# Section 4.10 : L'Hospital's Rule And Indeterminate Forms

Back in the chapter on Limits we saw methods for dealing with the following
limits.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 4}\frac{x^2 - 16}{x - 4} \quad \quad \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\frac{4x^2 - 5x}{1 - 3x^2} $$

In the first limit if we plugged in $x = 4$ we would get 0/0 and in the second
limit if we "plugged" in infinity we would get $\infty$/$-\infty$
([**recall**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/LimitsAtInfinityI.aspx#Limit_LimAtInt_PolyLim)
that as $x$ goes to infinity a polynomial will behave in teh same fashion that
its largest power behaves). Both of these are called **indeterminate forms**. In
both of these cases there are competing interests or rules and it's not clear
which will win out.

In the case of 0/0 we typically think of a fraction that has a numerator of zero
as being zero. However, we also tend to think of fractions in which the
denominator is going to zero, in the limit, as infinity or might not exist at
all. Likewise, we tend to think of a fraction in which the numerator and
denominator are the same as one. So, which will win out? Or will neither win out
and they all "cancel out" and the limit will reach some other value?

In the case of $\infty$/$-\infty$ we have a similar set of problems. If the
numerator of a fraction is going to infinity we tend to think of the whole
fraction going to infinity. Also, if the denominator is going to infinity, in
the limit, we tend to think of the fraction as going to zero. We also have the
case of a fraction in which the numerator and denominator are the same (ignoring
the minus sign) and so we might get -1. Again, it's not clear which of these
will win out, if any of them will win out.

With the second limit there is the further problem that infinity isn't really a
number and so we really shouldn't even treat it like a number. Much of the time
it simply won't behave as we would expect it to if it was a number. To look a
little more into this, check out the
[**Types of Infinity**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/TypesOfInfinity.aspx)
section in the Extras chapter at the end of this document.

This is the problem with indeterminate forms. It's just not clear what is
happening in the limit. There are other types of indeterminate forms as well.
Some other types are,

$$ (0)(\pm \infty) \quad \quad 1^{\infty} \quad \quad 0^0 \quad \quad \infty^0 \quad \quad \infty - \infty $$

These all have competing interests or rules that tell us what should happen and
it's just not clear which, if any, of the interests or rules will win out. The
topic of this section is how to deal with these kinds of limits.

As already pointed out we do know how to deal with some kinds of indeterminate
forms already. For the two limits above we work them as follows.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 4}\frac{x^2 - 16}{x - 4} = \lim\limits_{x \to 4}(x + 4) = 8 $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\frac{4x^2 - 5x}{1 - 3x^2} = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\frac{4 - \dfrac{5}{x}}{\dfrac{1}{x^2} - 3} = -\frac{4}{3} $$

In the first case we simply factored, canceled and took the limit and in the
second case we factored out an $x^2$ from both the numerator and the denominator
and took the limit. Notice as well that none of the competing interests or rules
in these cases won out! That is often the case.

So, we can deal with some of these. However, what about the following two
limits.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 0}\frac{\sin x}{x} \quad \quad \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^x}{x^2} $$

This first is a 0/0 indeterminate form, but we can't factor this one. The second
is an $\infty$/$\infty$ indeterminate form, but we can't just factor an $x^2$
out of the numerator. So, nothing that we've got in our bag of tricks will work
with these two limits.

This is where the subject of this section comes into play.

**L'Hospital's Rule**

> Suppose that we have one of the following cases,
>
> $$ \lim\limits_{x \to a}\frac{f(x)}{g(x)} = \frac{0}{0} \quad \quad \text{ OR } \quad \quad \lim\limits_{x \to a}\frac{f(x)}{g(x)} = \frac{\pm \infty}{\pm \infty} $$
>
> where $a$ can be any real number, infinity or negative infinity. In these
> cases we have,
>
> $$ \lim\limits_{x \to a}\frac{f(x)}{g(x)} = \lim\limits_{x \to a}\frac{f'(x)}{g'(x)} $$

So, L'Hospital's Rule tells us that if we have an indeterminate form 0/0 or
$\infty$/$\infty$ all we need to do is differentiate the numerator and
differentiate the denominator and then take the limit.

Before proceeding with examples let me address the spelling of "L'Hospital". The
more modern spelling is "L'Hôpital". However, when I first learned Calculus my
teacher used the spelling that I use in these notes and the first text book that
I taught Calculus out of also used the spelling that I use here.

Also, as noted on the Wikipedia page for L'Hospital's Rule,

"In the 17th and 18th centuries, the name was commonly spelled "l'Hospital"",
and he himself spelled his name that way. However, French spellings have been
altered: the silent 's' has been removed and replaced with the circumflex over
the preceding vowel. The former spelling is still used in English where there is
no circumflex."

So, the spelling that I've used here is an acceptable spelling of his name,
albeit not the modern spelling, and because I’m used to spelling it as
"L'Hospital" that is the spelling that I'm going to use in these notes.

Let's work some examples.

---

**Example 1** Evaluate each of the following limits.

**(a)** $\lim\limits_{x \to 0}\dfrac{\sin x}{x}$

**Solution**

So, we have already established that this is a 0/0 indeterminate form so let's
just apply L'Hospital's Rule.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 0}\frac{\sin x}{x} = \lim\limits_{x \to 0}\frac{\cos x}{1} = \frac{1}{1} = 1 $$

**(b)** $\lim\limits_{t \to 1}\dfrac{5t^4 - 4t^2 - 1}{10 - t - 9t^3}$

**Solution**

In this case we also have a 0/0 indeterminate form and if we were really good at
factoring we could factor the numerator and denominator, simplify and take the
limit. However, that's going to be more work than just using L'Hospital's Rule.

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to 1}\frac{5t^4 - 4t^2 - 1}{10 - t - 9t^3} = \lim\limits_{t \to 1}\frac{20t^3 - 8t}{-1 - 27t^2} = \frac{20 - 8}{-1 - 27} = -\frac{3}{7} $$

**\(c\)** $\lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\dfrac{\mathbf{e}^x}{x^2}$

**Solution**

This was the other limit that we started off looking at and we know that it's
the indeterminate form $\infty$/$\infty$ so let's apply L'Hospital's Rule.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^x}{x^2} = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^x}{2x} $$

Now we have a small problem. This new limit is also a $\infty$/$\infty$
indeterminate form. However, it's not really a problem. We know how to deal with
these kinds of limits. Just apply L'Hospital's Rule.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^x}{x^2} = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^x}{2x} = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^x}{2} = \infty $$

Sometimes we will need to apply L'Hospital's Rule more than once.

---

L'Hospital's Rule works great on the two indeterminate forms 0/0 and
$\pm \infty$/$\pm \infty$. However, there are many more indeterminate forms out
there as we saw earlier. Let's take a look at some of those and see how we deal
with those kinds of indeterminate forms.

We'll start with the indeterminate form $(0)(\pm \infty)$.

---

**Example 2** Evaluate the following limit.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 0^+}x\ln x $$

**Solution**

Note that we really do need to do the right-hand limit here. We know that the
natural logarithm is only defined for positive $x$ and so this is the only limit
that makes any sense.

Now, in the limit, we get the indeterminate form $(0)(-\infty)$. L'Hospital's
Rule wn't work on products, it only works on quotients. However, we can turn
this into a fraction if we rewrite things a little.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 0^+}x\ln x = \lim\limits_{x \to 0^+}\frac{\ln x}{\dfrac{1}{x}} $$

The function is the same, just rewritten, and the limit is now in the form
$-\infty$/$\infty$ and we can now use L'Hospital's Rule.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 0^+}x\ln x = \lim\limits_{x \to 0^+}\frac{\ln x}{\dfrac{1}{x}} = \lim\limits_{x \to 0^+}\frac{\dfrac{1}{x}}{-\dfrac{1}{x^2}} $$

Now, this is a mess, but it cleans up nicely.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 0^+}x\ln x = \lim\limits_{x \to 0^+}\frac{\dfrac{1}{x}}{-\dfrac{1}{x^2}} = \lim\limits_{x \to 0^+}(-x) = 0 $$

---

In the previous example we used the fact that we can always write a product of
functions as a quotient by doing one of the following.

$$ f(x)g(x) = \frac{g(x)}{\dfrac{1}{f(x)}} \quad \quad \text{ OR } \quad \quad f(x)g(x) = \frac{f(x)}{\dfrac{1}{g(x)}} $$

Using these two facts will allow us to turn any limit in the form
$(0)(\pm \infty)$ into a limit in the form 0/0 or $\pm \infty$/$\pm \infty$.
Which one of these two we get after doing the rewrite will depend upon which
fact we used to do the rewrite. One of the rewrites will give 0/0 and the other
will give $\pm \infty$/$\pm \infty$. It all depends on which function stays in
the numerator and which gets moved down to the denominator.

Let's take a look at another example.

---

**Example 3** Evaluate the following limit.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}x\mathbf{e}^x $$

**Solution**

So, it’s in the form $(\infty)(0)$. This means that we'll need to write it as a
quotient. Moving the $x$ to the denominator worked in the previous example so
let's try that with this problem as well.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}x\mathbf{e}^x = \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^x}{\dfrac{1}{x}} $$

Writing the product in this way gives us a product that has the form 0/0 in the
limit. So, let's use L'Hospital's Rule on the quotient.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}x\mathbf{e}^x = \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^x}{\frac{1}{x}} = \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^x}{-\dfrac{1}{x^2}} = \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^x}{\dfrac{2}{x^3}} = \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^x}{-\frac{6}{x^4}} = \dots $$

Hummmm.... This doesn't seem to be getting us anywhere. With each application of
L'Hospital's Rule we just end up with another 0/0 indeterminate form and in fact
the derivatives seem to be getting worse and worse. Also note that if we
simplified the quotient back into a product we would just end up with either
$(\infty)(0)$ or $(-\infty)(0)$ and so that won't do us any good.

This does not mean however that the limit can't be done. It just means that we
moved the wrong function to the denominator. Let's move the exponential function
instead.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}x\mathbf{e}^x = \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\frac{x}{\dfrac{1}{\mathbf{e}^x}} = \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\frac{x}{\mathbf{e}^{-x}} $$

Note that we used the fact that,

$$ \frac{1}{\mathbf{e}^x} = \mathbf{e}^{-x} $$

to simplify the quotient up a little. This will help us when it comes time to
take some derivatives. The quotient is now an indeterminate form of
$-\infty$/$\infty$ and using L'Hospital's Rule gives,

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}x\mathbf{e}^x = \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\frac{x}{\mathbf{e}^{-x}} = \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\frac{1}{-\mathbf{e}^{-x}} = 0 $$

---

So, when faced with a product $(0)(\pm \infty)$ we can turn it into a quotient
that will allow us to use L'Hospital's Rule. However, as we saw in the last
example we need to be careful with how we do that on occasion. Sometimes we can
use either quotient and in other cases only one will work.

Let's now take a look at the indeterminate forms,

$$ 1^{\infty} \quad \quad 0^0 \quad \quad \infty^0 $$

These can all be dealt with in the following way so we'll just work one example.

---

**Example 4** Evaluate the following limit.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}x^{\frac{1}{x}} $$

**Solution**

In the limit this is the indeterminate form

$$ \infty^0 $$

. We're actually going to spend most of this problem on a different limit. Let's
first define the following.

$$ y = x^{\frac{1}{x}} $$

Now, if we take the natural log of both sides we get,

$$ \ln(y) = \ln\left(x^{\frac{1}{x}}\right) = \frac{1}{x}\ln x = \frac{\ln x}{x} $$

Let's now take a look at the following limit.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\ln(y) = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\frac{\ln x}{x} = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\frac{\dfrac{1}{x}}{1} = 0 $$

This limit was just a L'Hospital's Rule problem and we know how to do those. So,
what did this have to do with our limit? Well first notice that,

$$ \mathbf{e}^{\ln(y)} = y $$

and so our limit could be written as,

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}x^{\frac{1}{x}} = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty} y = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\mathbf{e}^{\ln(y)} $$

We can now use the limit above to finish this problem.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}x^{\frac{1}{x}} = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty} y = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\mathbf{e}^{\ln(y)} = \mathbf{e}^{\lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\ln(y)} = \mathbf{e}^0 = 1 $$

---

With L'Hospital's Rule we are now able to take the limit of a wide variety of
indeterminate forms that we were unable to deal with prior to this section.

---

## Practice Problems

Use L'Hospital's Rule to evaluate each of the following limits.

**1.** $\lim\limits_{x \to 2}\dfrac{x^3 - 7x^2 + 10x}{x^2 + x - 6}$

**Solution**

Technically we could just factor out here, but L'Hospital's Rule makes this
easier. Firstly though we should check that indeed this limit gives us an
indeterminate form, which we can find by simply plugging in $x = 2$ into our
given output function:

$$ \text{as } x \to 2 \quad \quad \frac{x^3 - 7x^2 + 10x}{x^2 + x - 6} \to \frac{0}{0} $$

And so yes, this is a form that alows for the use of L'Hospital's Rule.

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 2}\dfrac{x^3 - 7x^2 + 10x}{x^2 + x - 6} = \lim\limits_{x \to 2}\frac{3x^2 - 14x + 10}{2x + 1} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 2}\frac{3x^2 - 14x + 10}{2x + 1} = \frac{3(2)^2 - 14(2) + 10}{2(2) + 1} = -\frac{6}{5} $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{x \to 2}\frac{3x^2 - 14x + 10}{2x + 1} = -\frac{6}{5}} $$

**2.** $\lim\limits_{w \to -4}\dfrac{\sin\left(\pi w\right)}{w^2 - 16}$

**Solution**

Double check L'Hospital's Rule form is applicable:

$$ \text{as } w \to -4 \quad \quad \frac{\sin(\pi w)}{w^2 - 16} \to \frac{0}{0} $$

Okay, we can use it:

$$ \lim\limits_{w \to -4}\dfrac{\sin\left(\pi w\right)}{w^2 - 16} = \lim\limits_{w \to -4}\frac{\pi\cos(\pi w)}{2w} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{w \to -4}\frac{\pi\cos(\pi w)}{2w} = \frac{\pi(1)}{2(-4)} = -\frac{\pi}{8} $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{w \to -4}\dfrac{\sin\left(\pi w\right)}{w^2 - 16} = -\frac{\pi}{8}} $$

**3.** $,\lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\dfrac{\ln(3t)}{t^2}$

**Solution**

Check:

$$ \text{as } t \to \infty \quad \quad \frac{\ln(3t)}{t^2} \to \frac{\infty}{\infty} $$

We can use L'Hospital's Rule.

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\frac{\ln(3t)}{t^2} = \lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\frac{\frac{3}{3t}}{2t} = \lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\frac{3}{6t^2} = \lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\frac{1}{2t^2} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\frac{1}{2t^2} = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\frac{\ln(3t)}{t^2} = 0} $$

**4.** $\lim\limits_{z \to 0}\dfrac{\sin(2z) + 7z^2 - 2z}{z^2(z + 1)^2}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } z \to 0 \quad \quad \frac{\sin(2z) + 7z^2 - 2z}{z^2(z + 1)^2} \to \frac{0}{0} $$

Indeterminate form shows L'Hospital's Rule is applicable. But simplify the
distribute the denominator first.

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to 0}\dfrac{\sin(2z) + 7z^2 - 2z}{z^2(z + 1)^2} = \lim\limits_{z \to 0}\frac{\sin(2z) + 7z^2 - 2z}{z^2(z^2 + 2z + 1)} = \lim\limits_{z \to 0}\frac{\sin(2z) + 7z^2 - 2z}{z^4 + 2z^3 + z^2} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to 0}\frac{\sin(2z) + 7z^2 - 2z}{z^4 + 2z^3 + z^2} = \lim\limits_{z \to 0}\frac{2\cos(2z) + 14z - 2}{4z^3 + 6z^2 + 2z} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to 0}\frac{2\cos(2z) + 14z - 2}{4z^3 + 6z^2 + 2z} = \frac{0}{0}  $$

Use L'Hospital's Rule again:

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to 0}\frac{2\cos(2z) + 14z - 2}{4z^3 + 6z^2 + 2z} = \lim\limits_{z \to 0}\frac{-4\sin(2z) + 14}{12z^2 + 12z + 2} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to 0}\frac{-4\sin(2z) + 14}{12z^2 + 12z + 2} = 7 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{z \to 0}\dfrac{\sin(2z) + 7z^2 - 2z}{z^2(z + 1)^2} = 7} $$

**5.** $\lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\dfrac{x^2}{\mathbf{e}^{1 - x}}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } x \to -\infty \quad \quad \frac{x^2}{\mathbf{e}^{1 - x}} \to \frac{\infty}{\infty}  $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\dfrac{x^2}{\mathbf{e}^{1 - x}} = \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\frac{2x}{\mathbf{e}^{1 - x}} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\frac{2x}{\mathbf{e}^{1 - x}} = \frac{\infty}{\infty} $$

Again:

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\frac{2x}{\mathbf{e}^{1 - x}} = \lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\frac{2}{\mathbf{e}^{1 - x}} = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{x \to -\infty}\dfrac{x^2}{\mathbf{e}^{1 - x}} = 0} $$

**6.**
$\lim\limits_{z \to \infty}\dfrac{z^2 + \mathbf{e}^{4z}}{2z - \mathbf{e}^z}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } z \to \infty \quad \quad \frac{z^2 + \mathbf{e}^{4z}}{2z - \mathbf{e}^z} \to \frac{\infty}{-\infty}  $$

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to \infty}\dfrac{z^2 + \mathbf{e}^{4z}}{2z - \mathbf{e}^z} = \lim\limits_{z \to \infty}\frac{2z + 4\mathbf{e}^{4z}}{2 - \mathbf{e}^z} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to \infty}\frac{2z + 4\mathbf{e}^{4z}}{2 - \mathbf{e}^z} = \frac{\infty}{-\infty} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to \infty}\frac{2z + 4\mathbf{e}^{4z}}{2 - \mathbf{e}^z} = \lim\limits_{z \to \infty}\frac{2 + 16\mathbf{e}^{4z}}{-\mathbf{e}^z} = \frac{\infty}{-\infty} $$

Instead of applying again, express this in a different form:

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to \infty}\frac{2 + 16\mathbf{e}^{4z}}{-\mathbf{e}^z} = \lim\limits_{z \to \infty}\left(2 + 16\mathbf{e}^{4z}\right)(-\mathbf{e}^{-z}) = \lim\limits_{z \to \infty}\left(-2\mathbf{e}^{-z} - 16\mathbf{e}^{3z}\right) = 0 - \infty = -\infty $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{z \to \infty}\dfrac{z^2 + \mathbf{e}^{4z}}{2z - \mathbf{e}^z} = -\infty} $$

**7.**
$\lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\left[t\ln\left(1 + \dfrac{3}{t}\right)\right]$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } t \to \infty \quad \quad t\ln\left(1 + \frac{3}{t}\right) \to (\infty)(0) $$

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\left[t\ln\left(1 + \dfrac{3}{t}\right)\right] = \lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\frac{\ln\left(1 + \dfrac{3}{t}\right)}{\dfrac{1}{t}} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\frac{\ln\left(1 + \dfrac{3}{t}\right)}{\dfrac{1}{t}} = \lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\frac{\dfrac{\left(1 + \dfrac{3}{t}\right)'}{1 + \dfrac{3}{t}}}{-\dfrac{1}{t^2}} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\frac{\dfrac{-\dfrac{3}{t^{-2}}}{1 + \dfrac{3}{t}}}{-\dfrac{1}{t^2}} = \lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\frac{-3t^2\left(1 + \dfrac{3}{t}\right)^{-1}}{-\left(t^{-2}\right)} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\frac{-3t^{-2}\left(1 + \dfrac{3}{t}\right)^{-1}}{-\left(t^{-2}\right)} = \lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\frac{3}{1 + \dfrac{3}{t}} = 3 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{t \to \infty}\left[t\ln\left(1 + \dfrac{3}{t}\right)\right] = 3} $$

**8.** $\lim\limits_{w \to 0^+}\left[w^2\ln\left(4w^2\right)\right]$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } w \to 0^+ \quad \quad w^2\ln\left(4w^2\right) \to (0)(-\infty) $$

$$ \lim\limits_{w \to 0^+}\left[w^2\ln\left(4w^2\right)\right] = \lim\limits_{w \to 0^+}\frac{\ln\left(4w^2\right)}{w^{-2}} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{w \to 0^+}\frac{\ln\left(4w^2\right)}{w^{-2}} = \lim\limits_{w \to 0^+}\frac{\dfrac{\left(4w^2\right)'}{4w^2}}{-2w^{-3}} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{w \to 0^+}\frac{\dfrac{\left(4w^2\right)'}{4w^2}}{-2w^{-3}} = \lim\limits_{w \to 0^+}\frac{\dfrac{8w}{4w^2}}{-2w^{-3}} = \lim\limits_{w \to 0^+}\frac{2w^{-1}}{-2w^{-3}} = \lim\limits_{w \to 0^+}(-w^2) = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{w \to 0^+}\left[w^2\ln\left(4w^2\right)\right] = 0} $$

**9.**
$\lim\limits_{x \to 1^+}\left[(x - 1)\tan\left(\dfrac{\pi}{2}x\right)\right]$

**Solution**

$$ \text{ as } x \to 1^+ \quad \quad (x - 1)\tan\left(\dfrac{\pi}{2}x\right) \to (0)(-\infty) $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 1^+}\left[(x - 1)\tan\left(\dfrac{\pi}{2}x\right)\right] = \lim\limits_{x \to 1^+}\frac{x - 1}{\left[\tan\left(\dfrac{\pi}{2}x\right)\right]^{-1}} = \lim\limits_{x \to 1^+}\frac{x - 1}{\cot\left(\dfrac{\pi}{2}x\right)} $$

$$ \text{as } x \to 1+ \quad \quad \frac{x - 1}{\cot\left(\dfrac{\pi}{2}x\right)} \to \frac{0}{0}  $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 1^+}\frac{x - 1}{\cot\left(\dfrac{\pi}{2}x\right)} = \lim\limits_{x \to 1^+}\frac{1}{-\dfrac{\pi}{2}\csc^2\left(\dfrac{\pi}{2}x\right)} = -\frac{2}{\pi} $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{x \to 1^+}\left[(x - 1)\tan\left(\dfrac{\pi}{2}x\right)\right] = -\frac{2}{\pi}} $$

**10.** $\lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\left[\cos(2y)\right]^{\frac{1}{y^2}}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } y \to 0^+ \quad \quad \left[\cos(2y)\right]^{\frac{1}{y^2}} \to 1^{\infty} $$

Let's substitute:

$$ z = \left[\cos(2y)\right]^{\frac{1}{y^2}} $$

$$ \ln z = \ln\left(\left[\cos(2y)\right]^{\frac{1}{y^2}}\right) = \frac{1}{y^2}\ln\left[\cos(2y)\right] = \frac{\ln\left[\cos(2y)\right]}{y^2} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\left[\ln z\right] = \lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\left[\frac{\ln\left[\cos(2y)\right]}{y^2}\right] $$

$$ \lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\left[\frac{\ln\left[\cos(2y)\right]}{y^2}\right] = \lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\left[\frac{\dfrac{-2\sin(2y)}{\cos(2y)}}{2y}\right] $$

$$ \lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\left[\frac{\dfrac{-2\sin(2y)}{\cos(2y)}}{2y}\right] = \lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\left(\frac{-\tan(2y)}{y}\right) $$

$$ \text{as } y \to 0^+ \quad \quad \frac{-\tan(2y)}{y} \to \frac{0}{0} $$

Apply L'Hospital's Rule again:

$$ \lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\left[\ln z\right] = \lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\left(\frac{-\tan(2y)}{y}\right) = \lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\frac{-2\sec^2(2y)}{1} = -2 $$

Now, all we have to recall that if:

$$ \ln z = \ln\left(\left[\cos(2y)\right]^{\frac{1}{y^2}}\right) $$

Then this means that:

$$ z = \mathbf{e}^{\ln z} $$

We can therefore ascertain 5hat:

$$ \lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\left[\cos(2y)\right]^{\frac{1}{y^2}} = \lim\limits_{y \to 0^+} z = \lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\mathbf{e}^{\ln z} = \mathbf{e}^{\lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\left[\ln z\right]} = \mathbf{e}^{-2} $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{y \to 0^+}\left[\cos(2y)\right]^{\frac{1}{y^2}} = \mathbf{e}^{-2}} $$

**11.** $\lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\mathbf{e}^x + x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{ as} x \to \infty \quad \quad \left[\mathbf{e}^x + x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}} \to \infty^0 $$

$$ z = \left[\mathbf{e}^x + x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}} $$

$$ \ln z = \ln\left[\left[\mathbf{e}^x + x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}}\right] = \frac{1}{x}\ln\left[\mathbf{e}^x + x\right] = \frac{\ln\left[\mathbf{e}^x + x\right]}{x} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\ln z\right] = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\frac{\ln\left[\mathbf{e}^x + x\right]}{x}\right] $$

$$ \text{as } x \to \infty \quad \quad \frac{\ln\left[\mathbf{e}^x + x\right]}{x} \to \frac{\infty}{\infty} $$

Apply L'Hospital's Rule again:

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\frac{\ln\left[\mathbf{e}^x + x\right]}{x}\right] = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\frac{\dfrac{\mathbf{e}^x + 1}{\mathbf{e}^x + x}}{1}\right] = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}^x + 1}{\mathbf{e}^x + x}\right) $$

$$ \text{as } x \to \infty \quad \quad \frac{\mathbf{e}^x + 1}{\mathbf{e}^x + x} \to \frac{\infty}{\infty} $$

Apply L'Hospital's Rule again:

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}^x + 1}{\mathbf{e}^x + x}\right) = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^x}{\mathbf{e}^x + 1} = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^x}{\mathbf{e}^x} = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}(1) = 1 $$

Recall that because:

$$ z = \left[\mathbf{e}^x + x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}} $$

Therefore:

$$ z = \mathbf{e}^{\ln z} $$

And therefore:

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\mathbf{e}^x + x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}} = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\ln z = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\mathbf{e}^{\ln z} = \mathbf{e}^{\lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\ln z\right]} = \mathbf{e}^1 = \mathbf{e} $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\mathbf{e}^x + x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}} = \mathbf{e}} $$

---

## Assignment Problems

For problems 1 – 18 use L'Hospital's Rule to evaluate the given limit.

**1.** $\lim\limits_{x \to -4}\dfrac{x^3 + 6x^2 - 32}{x^3 + 5x^2 + 4x}$

**Solution**

Firstly, let's make sure attempts at finding the limit yield us an indeterminate
form for which it is acceptable to use L'Hospital's Rule:

$$ \text{as } x \to -4 \quad \quad \frac{x^3 + 6x^2 - 32}{x^3 + 5x^2 + 4x} \to \frac{0}{0} $$

Thusly it is appropriate to use L'Hospital's Rule here. This is simple enough,
let's just take the first derivative of the numerator and denominator and then
solve for the limit:

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to -4}\dfrac{x^3 + 6x^2 - 32}{x^3 + 5x^2 + 4x} = \lim\limits_{x \to -4}\frac{3x^2 + 12x}{3x^2 + 10x + 4} = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{x \to -4}\dfrac{x^3 + 6x^2 - 32}{x^3 + 5x^2 + 4x} = 0} $$

**2.**
$\lim\limits_{w \to -\infty}\dfrac{\mathbf{e}^{-6w}}{4 + \mathbf{e}^{-3w}}$

**Solution**

We'll go a bit faster and more abbreviated reasoning as we go along here now.

Can we apply L'Hospital's Rule?:

$$ \text{as } w \to -\infty \quad \quad \frac{\mathbf{e}^{-6w}}{4 + \mathbf{e}^{-3w}} \to \frac{\infty}{\infty} $$

Yes, let's take the first derivative of both numerator and denomator:

$$ \lim\limits_{w \to -\infty}\dfrac{\mathbf{e}^{-6w}}{4 + \mathbf{e}^{-3w}} = \lim\limits_{w \to -\infty}\frac{-6\mathbf{e}^{-6w}}{-3\mathbf{e}^{-3w}} = \lim\limits_{w \to -\infty}(2\mathbf{e}^{-3w}) = \infty $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{w \to -\infty}\dfrac{\mathbf{e}^{-6w}}{4 + \mathbf{e}^{-3w}} = \infty} $$

**3.** $\lim\limits_{t \to 0}\dfrac{\sin(6t)}{\sin(11t)}$

**Solution**

Apply L'Hospital's Rule?:

$$ \text{as } t \to 0 \quad \quad \frac{\sin(6t)}{\sin(11t)} \to \frac{0}{0} $$

Yes, take first derivative of num/den:

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to 0}\dfrac{\sin(6t)}{\sin(11t)} = \lim\limits_{t \to 0}\frac{6\cos(6t)}{11\cos(11t)} = \frac{6}{11} $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{t \to 0}\dfrac{\sin(6t)}{\sin(11t)} = \frac{6}{11}} $$

**4.** $\lim\limits_{x \to 1}\dfrac{x^2 + 8x - 9}{x^3 - 2x^2 - 5x + 6}$

**Solution**

Apply?:

$$ \text{as } x \to 1 \quad \quad \frac{x^2 + 8x - 9}{x^3 - 2x^2 - 5x + 6} \to \frac{0}{0} $$

Yes, first derivative:

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 1}\dfrac{x^2 + 8x - 9}{x^3 - 2x^2 - 5x + 6} = \lim\limits_{x \to 1}\frac{2x + 8}{3x^2 - 2x - 5} = -\frac{5}{2} $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{x \to 1}\dfrac{x^2 + 8x - 9}{x^3 - 2x^2 - 5x + 6} = -\frac{5}{2}} $$

**5.** $\lim\limits_{t \to 2}\dfrac{t^3 - 7t^2 + 16t - 12}{t^4 - 4t^3 + 4t^2}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } t \to 2 \quad \quad \frac{t^3 - 7t^2 + 16t - 12}{t^4 - 4t^3 + 4t^2} = \frac{0}{0} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to 2}\dfrac{t^3 - 7t^2 + 16t - 12}{t^4 - 4t^3 + 4t^2} = \lim\limits_{t \to 2}\frac{3t^2 - 14t + 16}{4t^3 - 12t^2 + 8t} = \frac{0}{0} $$

Again:

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to 2}\frac{3t^2 - 14t + 16}{4t^3 - 12t^2 + 8t} = \lim\limits_{t \to 2}\frac{6t - 14}{12t^2 - 24t + 8} = -\frac{1}{4} $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{t \to 2}\dfrac{t^3 - 7t^2 + 16t - 12}{t^4 - 4t^3 + 4t^2} = -\frac{1}{4}} $$

**6.** $\lim\limits_{w \to -\infty}\dfrac{w^2 - 4w + 1}{3w^2 + 7w - 4}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } w \to -\infty \quad \quad \frac{w^2 - 4w + 1}{3w^2 + 7w - 4} \to \frac{\infty}{\infty}  $$

$$ \lim\limits_{w \to -\infty}\dfrac{w^2 - 4w + 1}{3w^2 + 7w - 4} = \lim\limits_{w \to -\infty}\frac{2w - 4}{6w + 7} = \frac{\infty}{\infty} $$

Again:

$$ \lim\limits_{w \to -\infty}\frac{2w - 4}{6w + 7} = \lim\limits_{w \to -\infty}\frac{2}{6} = \frac{2}{6} = \frac{1}{3} $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{w \to -\infty}\dfrac{w^2 - 4w + 1}{3w^2 + 7w - 4} = \frac{1}{3}} $$

**7.**
$\lim\limits_{y \to \infty}\dfrac{y^2 - \mathbf{e}^{6y}}{4y^2 + \mathbf{e}^{7y}}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } y \to \infty \quad \quad \frac{y^2 - \mathbf{e}^{6y}}{4y^2 + \mathbf{e}^{7y}} \to \frac{\infty}{\infty} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{y \to \infty}\dfrac{y^2 - \mathbf{e}^{6y}}{4y^2 + \mathbf{e}^{7y}} = \lim\limits_{y \to \infty}\frac{2y - 6\mathbf{e}^{6y}}{8y + 7\mathbf{e}^{7y}} = \frac{\infty}{\infty} $$

This will always give us the same indeterminate form. Instead let's try to
factor out $\mathbf{e}^{7y}$ from both the num/den:

$$ \lim\limits_{y \to \infty}\frac{y^2 - \mathbf{e}^{6y}}{4y^2 + \mathbf{e}^{7y}} = \lim\limits_{y \to \infty}\frac{\mathbf{e}^{7y}\left(y^2\mathbf{e}^{-7y} - \mathbf{e}^{-y}\right)}{\mathbf{e}^{7y}\left(4y^2\mathbf{e}^{-7y} + 1\right)} = \frac{(\infty)(0) - 0}{(\infty)(0) + 1} = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{y \to \infty}\frac{y^2 - \mathbf{e}^{6y}}{4y^2 + \mathbf{e}^{7y}} = 0} $$

**8.** $\lim\limits_{x \to 0}\dfrac{2\cos(4x) - 4x^2 - 2}{\sin(2x) - x^2 - 2x}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } x \to 0 \quad \quad \frac{2\cos(4x) - 4x^2 - 2}{\sin(2x) - x^2 - 2x} \to \frac{0}{0} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 0}\dfrac{2\cos(4x) - 4x^2 - 2}{\sin(2x) - x^2 - 2x} = \lim\limits_{x \to 0}\frac{-8\sin(4x) - 8x}{2\cos(2x) - 2x - 2} = \frac{0}{0} = \frac{0}{0} $$

Again:

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 0}\frac{-8\sin(4x) - 8x}{2\cos(2x) - 2x - 2} = \lim\limits_{x \to 0}\frac{-32\cos(4x) - 8}{-4\sin(2x) - 2} = \frac{-40}{-2} = 20 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{x \to 0}\dfrac{2\cos(4x) - 4x^2 - 2}{\sin(2x) - x^2 - 2x} = 20} $$

**9.**
$\lim\limits_{x \to -3}\dfrac{3\mathbf{e}^{2x + 6} + x^2 - 12}{x^3 + 6x^2 + 9x}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } x \to -3 \quad \quad \frac{3\mathbf{e}^{2x + 6} + x^2 - 12}{x^3 + 6x^2 + 9x} \to \frac{0}{0} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to -3}\dfrac{3\mathbf{e}^{2x + 6} + x^2 - 12}{x^3 + 6x^2 + 9x} = \lim\limits_{x \to -3}\frac{3(2x + 6)'\mathbf{e}^{2x + 6} + 2x}{3x^2 + 12x + 9} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to -3}\frac{3(2x + 6)'\mathbf{e}^{2x + 6} + 2x}{3x^2 + 12x + 9} = \lim\limits_{x \to -3}\frac{3(2)\mathbf{e}^{2x + 6} + 2x}{3x^2 + 12x + 9} = \frac{0}{0} $$

Again:

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to -3}\frac{6\mathbf{e}^{2x + 6} + 2x}{3x^2 + 12x + 9} = \lim\limits_{x \to -3}\frac{12\mathbf{e}^{2x + 6} + 2}{6x + 12} = -\frac{7}{3} $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{x \to -3}\dfrac{3\mathbf{e}^{2x + 6} + x^2 - 12}{x^3 + 6x^2 + 9x} = -\frac{7}{3}} $$

**10.** $\lim\limits_{z \to 6}\dfrac{\sin\left(\pi z\right)}{\ln(z - 5)}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } z \to 6 \quad \quad \frac{\sin\left(\pi z\right)}{\ln(z - 5)} \to \frac{0}{0} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to 6}\dfrac{\sin\left(\pi z\right)}{\ln(z - 5)} = \lim\limits_{z \to 6}\frac{\pi\cos(\pi z)}{\dfrac{1}{z - 5}} = \lim\limits_{z \to 6}\pi\cos(\pi z)(z - 5) = \pi $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{z \to 6}\dfrac{\sin\left(\pi z\right)}{\ln(z - 5)} = \pi} $$

**11.**
$\lim\limits_{w \to \infty}\left[w\ln\left(1 - \dfrac{2}{3w}\right)\right]$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } w \to \infty \quad \quad \left[w\ln\left(1 - \dfrac{2}{3w}\right)\right] \to (\infty)(0) $$

$$ \lim\limits_{w \to \infty}\left[w\ln\left(1 - \dfrac{2}{3w}\right)\right] = \lim\limits_{w \to \infty}\left[\frac{\ln\left(1 - \dfrac{2}{3w}\right)}{w^{-1}}\right] $$

$$ \lim\limits_{w \to \infty}\left[\frac{\ln\left(1 - \dfrac{2}{3w}\right)}{w^{-1}}\right] = \lim\limits_{w \to \infty}\left[\frac{\dfrac{\left(1 - \dfrac{2}{3w}\right)'}{1 - \dfrac{2}{3w}}}{w^{-2}}\right] $$

$$ \lim\limits_{w \to \infty}\left[\frac{\ln\left(1 - \dfrac{2}{3w}\right)}{w^{-1}}\right] = \lim\limits_{w \to \infty}\left[\frac{\dfrac{\dfrac{6}{9w^2}}{1 - \dfrac{2}{3w}}}{-w^{-2}}\right] $$

$$ \lim\limits_{w \to \infty}\left[\frac{\dfrac{\dfrac{6}{9w^2}}{1 - \dfrac{2}{3w}}}{-w^{-2}}\right] = \lim\limits_{w \to \infty}\frac{\dfrac{2}{3w^2}}{-w^{-2}\left(1 - \dfrac{2}{3w}\right)} = \lim\limits_{w \to \infty}\left(-\frac{2}{3\left(1 - \dfrac{2}{3w}\right)}\right) = -\frac{2}{3} $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{w \to \infty}\left[w\ln\left(1 - \dfrac{2}{3w}\right)\right] = -\frac{2}{3}} $$

**12.** $\lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left[\ln(t)\sin(t)\right]$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } t \to 0^+ \quad \quad \left[\ln(t)\sin(t)\right] \to (-\infty)(0) $$

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left[\ln(t)\sin(t)\right] = \lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left(\frac{\ln(t)}{\sin^{-1}(t)}\right) = \lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left(\frac{\ln(t)}{\csc(t)}\right) $$

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left(\frac{\ln(t)}{\csc(t)}\right) = \lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left[\frac{\dfrac{1}{t}}{-\csc(t)\cot(t)}\right] = \lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left[-\frac{\sin(t)\tan(t)}{t}\right] = \lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left[\frac{\sin^2(t)}{t\cos(t)}\right] = \lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left(\frac{\sin(t)}{t}\right)\left(\frac{\sin(t)}{\cos(t)}\right) = 1 \cdot 0 = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left[\ln(t)\sin(t)\right] = 0} $$

Note that the following:

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to 0}\left(\frac{\sin(t)}{t}\right) = 1 $$

Is found via the
[**Squeeze Theorem**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/ComputingLimits.aspx#MathJax-Element-69-Frame).
It is not intuitive and is generally memorized in Calculus I.
[**Here**](https://www.maths.tcd.ie/~lebed/Remarkable.pdf) is a short pdf
explaining why this is.

**13.** $\lim\limits_{z \to -\infty}z^2\mathbf{e}^z$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } z \to -\infty \quad \quad z^2\mathbf{e}^z \to (\infty)(0) $$

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to -\infty}z^2\mathbf{e}^z = \lim\limits_{z \to -\infty}\frac{z^2}{\mathbf{e}^{-z}} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to -\infty}\frac{z^2}{\mathbf{e}^{-z}} = \lim\limits_{z \to -\infty}\frac{2z}{-\mathbf{e}^{-z}} = \frac{\infty}{\infty} $$

Again:

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to -\infty}\frac{2z}{-\mathbf{e}^{-z}} = \lim\limits_{z \to -\infty}\frac{2}{\mathbf{e}^{-z}} = \lim\limits_{z \to -\infty}2\mathbf{e}^z = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{z \to -\infty}z^2\mathbf{e}^z = 0} $$

**14.** $\lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[x\sin\left(\dfrac{7}{x}\right)\right]$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } x \to \infty \left[x\sin\left(\dfrac{7}{x}\right)\right] \to (\infty)(0) $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[x\sin\left(\dfrac{7}{x}\right)\right] = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\frac{\sin\left(\dfrac{7}{x}\right)}{\dfrac{1}{x}}\right] $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\frac{\sin\left(\dfrac{7}{x}\right)}{\dfrac{1}{x}}\right] =  \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\frac{\cos\left(\dfrac{7}{x}\right)\left(\dfrac{7}{x}\right)'}{-\dfrac{1}{x^2}}\right] $$

$$ \left(\frac{7}{x}\right)' = \frac{(7)'(x) - (7)(x)'}{(x)^2} = \frac{-7}{x^2} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\frac{\cos\left(\dfrac{7}{x}\right)\left(\dfrac{-7}{x^2}\right)}{-\dfrac{1}{x^2}}\right] = \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\frac{\dfrac{-7\cos\left(\dfrac{7}{x}\right)}{x^2}}{-\dfrac{1}{x^2}}\right] = 7\cos\left(\frac{7}{x}\right) = 7 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[x\sin\left(\dfrac{7}{x}\right)\right] = 7} $$

**15.** $\lim\limits_{z \to 0^+}\left[z^2\left(\ln z\right)^2\right]$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } z \to 0^+ \quad \quad \left[z^2\left(\ln z\right)^2\right] \to (0)(\infty) $$

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to 0^+}\left[z^2\left(\ln z\right)^2\right] = \lim\limits_{z \to 0^+}\left[\frac{\left(\ln z\right)^2}{z^{-2}}\right] $$

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to 0^+}\left[\frac{\left(\ln z\right)^2}{z^{-2}}\right] = \lim\limits_{z \to 0^+}\left[\frac{2z^{-1}}{-2z^{-3}}\right] $$

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to 0^+}\left[\frac{2z^{-1}}{-2z^{-3}}\right] = \lim\limits_{z \to 0^+}-z^2 = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{z \to 0^+}\left[z^2\left(\ln z\right)^2\right] = 0} $$

**16.** $\lim\limits_{x \to 0^+}x^{\frac{1}{x}}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } x \to 0^+ \quad \quad x^{\frac{1}{x}} \to 0^{\infty} $$

This is not standard indeterminate form. Let's rewrite it and see if we can
reframe it to use L'Hospital's Rule. First let's use substitution:

$$ y = x^{\frac{1}{x}} $$

$$ \ln y = \ln\left(x^{\frac{1}{x}}\right) = \frac{1}{x}\ln x = \frac{\ln x}{x} $$

So the limit becomes:

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to 0^+}\left(\frac{\ln x}{x}\right) $$

$$ \text{as } x \to 0^+ \quad \quad \frac{\ln x}{x} \to \frac{-\infty}{0^+} $$

This is not in indeterminate form then, and technically L'Hospital's Rule does
not apply here.

$$ y = \mathbf{e}^{\ln y} \to \mathbf{e}^{-\infty} = 0 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{x \to 0^+}x^{\frac{1}{x}} = 0} $$

**17.** $\lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left[\mathbf{e}^t + t\right]^{\frac{1}{t}}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } t \to 0^+ \quad \quad \left[\mathbf{e}^t + t\right]^{\frac{1}{t}} \to 1^{\infty} $$

Use substitution:

$$ y = \left[\mathbf{e}^t + t\right]^{\frac{1}{t}} $$

$$ \ln y = \ln\left[\mathbf{e}^t + t\right]^{\frac{1}{t}}] = \frac{\ln\left[\mathbf{e}^t + t\right]}{t} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left[\ln y\right] = \lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left(\frac{\ln\left[\mathbf{e}^t + t\right]}{t}\right) $$

$$ \text{as } t \to 0^+ \quad \quad \frac{\ln\left[\mathbf{e}^t + t\right]}{t} \to \frac{0}{0} $$

Again:

$$ \lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left(\frac{\ln\left[\mathbf{e}^t + t\right]}{t}\right) = \lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left[\frac{\dfrac{\mathbf{e}^t + 1}{\mathbf{e}^t + t}}{1}\right] = \lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}^t + 1}{\mathbf{e}^t + t}\right) \to  \frac{1 + 1}{1 + 0} = 2 $$

$$ y = \left[\mathbf{e}^t + t\right]^{\frac{1}{t}} $$

$$ y = \mathbf{e}^{\ln y} $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{t \to 0^+}\left[\mathbf{e}^t + t\right]^{\frac{1}{t}} = \mathbf{e}^2} $$

**18.**
$\lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\mathbf{e}^{-2x} + 3x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}}$

**Solution**

$$ \text{as } x \to \infty \quad \quad \left[\mathbf{e}^{-2x} + 3x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}} \to 0^{0}  $$

Substitute:

$$ z = \left[\mathbf{e}^{-2x} + 3x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}} $$

$$ \ln z = \ln\left[\mathbf{e}^{-2x} + 3x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}} = \frac{\ln\left[\mathbf{e}^{-2x} + 3x\right]}{x} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\mathbf{e}^{-2x} + 3x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}} \left[\ln z\right] = \frac{\ln\left[\mathbf{e}^{-2x} + 3x\right]}{x} \to \frac{\infty}{\infty} $$

Again:

$$ \frac{\ln\left[\mathbf{e}^{-2x} + 3x\right]}{x} = \frac{-2\mathbf{e}^{-2x} + 3}{\mathbf{e}^{-2x} + 3x} \to \frac{1}{\infty} = 0 $$

$$ z = \left[\mathbf{e}^{-2x} + 3x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}} $$

$$ z = \mathbf{e}^{\ln z} $$

$$ \lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\mathbf{e}^{-2x} + 3x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}} = \mathbf{e}^{0} = 1 $$

$$ \boxed{\lim\limits_{x \to \infty}\left[\mathbf{e}^{-2x} + 3x\right]^{\frac{1}{x}} = 1} $$

**19.** Suppose that we know that $f'(x)$ is a continuous function. Use
L'Hospital's Rule to show that,

$$ \lim\limits_{h \to 0}\frac{f(x + h) - f(x - h)}{2h} = f'(x) $$

**Solution**

Firstly, let's establish that attempting to find the limit as it stands returns
an indeterminate form:

$$ \text{as } h \to 0 \quad \quad \frac{f(x + h) - f(x - h)}{2h} \to \frac{0}{0} $$

Let's now establish the first derivative for numerator and denominator to see
what we're working with here:

$$ f(x + h) - f(x - h) \to f'(x + h)(1) - f'(x - h)(-1) = f'(x + h) + f'(x - h) $$

$$ \lim\limits_{h \to 0}\frac{f(x + h) - f(x - h)}{2h} = \lim\limits_{h \to 0}\frac{f'(x + h) + f'(x - h)}{2} $$

Because we know that $f'(x)$ is continuous, we can assume that:

$$ \text{as } h \to 0 \quad \quad f'(x + h) \to f'(x) \text{ and } f'(x - h) \to f'(x) $$

Thusly this limit becomes:

$$ \lim\limits_{h \to 0}\frac{f'(x + h) + f'(x - h)}{2} \to \lim\limits_{h \to 0}\frac{f'(x) + f'(x)}{2} \to \lim\limits_{h \to 0}\frac{2f'(x)}{2} = f'(x) $$

And thusly we have proven that:

$$ \lim\limits_{h \to 0}\frac{f(x + h) - f(x - h)}{2h} = f'(x) $$

**20.** Suppose that we know that $f''(x)$ is a continuous function. Use
L'Hospital's Rule to show that,

$$ \lim\limits_{h \to 0}\frac{f(x + h) - 2f(x) + f(x - h)}{h^2} = f''(x) $$

**Solution**

Let's first evaluate if this is an indeterminate form:

$$ \text{as } h \to 0 \quad \quad f(x + h) -2f(x) + f(x - h) \to f(x) - 2(fx) + f(x) \to 0 \text{ and } h^2 \to 0 $$

Thusly:

$$ \text{as } h \to 0 \quad \quad \frac{f(x + h) - 2f(x) + f(x - h)}{h^2} \to \frac{0}{0} $$

Let's apply the first derivative to the num and dem:

$$ f'(x + h)(1) + f'(x - h)(-1) = f'(x + h) - f'(x - h) $$

$$ (h^2)' = 2h $$

So the limit becomes:

$$ \lim\limits_{h \to 0}\frac{f(x + h) - 2f(x) + f(x - h)}{h^2} = \lim\limits_{h \to 0}\frac{f'(x + h) - f'(x - h)}{2h} $$

This is the same form as problem 19, and so thusly we can say that if $f''(x)$
is continuous, then therefore we have already proven that:

$$ \lim\limits_{h \to 0}\frac{f(x + h) - 2f(x) + f(x - h)}{h^2} = f''(x) $$
