# Section 4.12 : Differentials

In this section we're going to introduce a notation that we'll be seeing quite a
bit in the next chapter. We will also look at an application of this new
notation.

Given a function $y = f(x)$ we call $dy$ and $dx$ differentials and the
relationship between them is given by,

$$ dy = f'(x)dx $$

Note that if we are just given $f(x)$ then the differentials are $df$ and $dx$
and we compute them in the same manner.

$$ df = f'(x)dx $$

Let's compute a couple of differentials.

---

**Example 1** Compute the differential for each of the following.

**Solution**

Before working any of these we should first discuss just what we're being asked
to find here. We defined two differentials earlier and here we're being asked to
compute a differential.

So, which differential are we being asked to compute? In this kind of problem
we're being asked to compute the differential of the function. In other words,
$dy$ for the first problem, $dw$ for the second problem and $df$ for the third
problem.

Here are the solutions. Not much to do here other than take a derivative and
don't forget to add on the second differential to the derivative.

**(a)** $y = t^3 - 4t^2 + 7t$

**Solution**

$$ dy = \left(3t^2 - 8t + 7\right)dt $$

**(b)** $w = x^2\sin(2x)$

**Solution**

$$ dw = \left(2x\sin(2x) + 2x^2\cos(2x)\right)dx $$

**\(c\)** $f(z) = \mathbf{e}^{3 - z^4}$

**Solution**

$$ df = -4z^3\mathbf{e}^{3 - z^4}dz $$

---

There is a nice application to differentials. If we think of $\Delta x$ as the
change in $x$ then $\Delta y = f(x + \Delta x) - f(x)$ is the change in $y$
corresponding to the change in $x$. Now, if $\Delta x$ is small we can assume
that $\Delta y \approx dy$. Let's see an illustration of this idea.

---

**Example 2** Compute $dy$ and $\Delta y$ if $y = \cos\left(x^2 + 1\right) - x$
as $x$ changes from $x = 2$ to $x = 2.03$.

**Solution**

First let's compute actual the change in $y$, $\Delta y$.

$$ \Delta y = \cos\left((2.03)^2 + 1\right) - 2.03 - \left(\cos(2^2 + 1) - 2\right) = 0.083581127 $$

Now let's get the formula for $dy$.

$$ dy = \left(-2x\sin\left(x^2 + 1\right) - 1\right)dx $$

Next, the change in $x$ from $x = 2$ to $x = 2.03$ is $\Delta x = 0.03$ and so
we then assume that $dx = \Delta x = 0.03$. This gives an approximate change in
$y$ of,

$$ dy = \left(-2(2)\sin\left(2^2 + 1\right) - 1\right)(0.03) = 0.085070913 $$

We can see that in fact we do have that $\Delta y \approx dy$ provided we keep
$\Delta x$ small.

---

We can use the fact that $\Delta y \approx dy$ in the following way.

---

**Example 3** A sphere was measured and its radius was found to be 45 inches
with a possible error of no more than 0.01 inches. What is the maximum possible
error in the volume if we use this value of the radius?

**Solution**

First, recall the equation for the volume of a sphere.

$$ V = \frac{4}{3}\pi r^3 $$

Now, if we start with $r = 45$ and use $dr \approx \Delta r = 0.01$ then
$\Delta V \approx dV$ should give us maximum error.

So, first get the formula for the differential.

$$ dV = 4\pi r^2dr $$

Now compute $dV$.

$$ \Delta V \approx dV = 4\pi(45)^2(0.01) = 254.47 \text{ in}^3 $$

The maximum error in the volume is then approximately 254.47 in<sup>3</sup>.

Be careful to not assume this is a large error. On the surface it looks large,
however if we compute the actual volume for $r = 45$ we get
$V = 381,703.51 \text{ in}^3$. So, in comparison the error in the volume is,

$$ \frac{254.47}{381703.51} \times 100 = 0.067\% $$

That's not much possible error at all!

---

## Practice Problems

For problems 1 - 3 compute the differential of the given function.

**1.** $f(x) = x^2 - \sec(x)$

**Solution**

Recall that the differential formula can be written as follows:

$$ df = f'(x)dx $$

Let's first take the first derivative:

$$ f'(x) = 2x - \sec(x)\tan(x) $$

Now plug this in:

$$ \boxed{df = \left(2x - \sec(x)\tan(x)\right)dx} $$

**2.** $w = \mathbf{e}^{x^4 - x^2 + 4x}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{dw = \left(4x^3 - 2x + 4\right)\mathbf{e}^{x^4 - x^2 + 4x}dx} $$

**3.** $h(z) = \ln(2z)\sin(2z)$

**Solution**

$$ h'(z) = (\ln(2z))'(\sin(2z)) + (\ln(2z))(\sin(2z))' $$

$$ h'(z) = \left(\frac{2}{2z}\right)(\sin(2z)) + (\ln(2z))(2\cos(2z)) $$

$$ h'(z) = \frac{1}{z}\sin(2z) + 2\ln(2z)\cos(2z) $$

$$ \boxed{dh = \left[\frac{1}{z}\sin(2z) + 2\ln(2z)\cos(2z)\right]dz} $$

**4.** Compute $dy$ and $\Delta y$ for $y = \mathbf{e}^{x^2}$ as $x$ changes
from $3$ to $3.01$.

**Solution**

This is similar to **Example 2**, so let's follow their lead, firstly let's
compute $\Delta y$. Recall firstly that the formula for $\Delta y$ is defined
as:

$$ \Delta y = f(x + \Delta x) - f(x) $$

Using this, we can plug the change in $y$, $\Delta y$ as:

$$ \Delta y = \mathbf{e}^{(3.01)^2} - \mathbf{e}^{(3)^2} \approx 501.9272 $$

We now can also compute $dy$:

$$ dy = 2x\mathbf{e}^{x^2}dx $$

$\Delta x$ is simply the diffreence between the two values that $x$ is changing
to.

$$ \Delta x = 3.01 - 3 = 0.01 $$

We can assume therefore that since $dx \approx \Delta x$ that:

$$ dx \approx \Delta x = 0.01 $$

This gives an approximate change in $y$ of,

$$ dy = 2x\mathbf{e}^{x^2}(0.01) $$

We can now plug in our original value of $x$ (prior to the change):

$$ \boxed{dy = 2(3)\mathbf{e}^{(3)^2}(0.01) \approx 486.1850} $$

And we can see here that indeed $dy \approx \Delta y$, as long as we keep
$\Delta x$ small.

**5.** Compute $dy$ and $\Delta y$ for $y = x^5 - 2x^3 + 7x$ as $x$ changes from
$6$ to $5.9$.

**Solution**

This will follow a similar pattern to **4**. Again recall that the the formula
for $\Delta y$ is:

$$ \Delta y = f(x + \Delta x) - f(x) $$

So plug in what we can:

$$ \Delta y = \left[(5.9)^5 - 2(5.9)^3 + 7(5.9)\right] - \left[(6)^5 - 2(6)^3 + 7(6)\right] \approx -606.215 $$

Now let's calculate $dy$:

$$ dy = \left(5x^4 - 6x^2 + 7\right)dx $$

Now, we know that $dy \approx \Delta x$, and that $\Delta x = 5.9 - 6 = -0.1$.
Therefore $dx \approx \Delta x = -0.1$. Let's plug that in and solve for $dy$:

$$ dy = \left(5x^4 - 6x^2 + 7\right)(-0.1) $$

And now we just plug in our original value for $x$ prior to the change ($x = 6$)
to find $dy$:

$$ \boxed{dy = \left(5(6)^4 - 6(6)^2 - 7\right)(-0.1) = -627.1} $$

And we can see that indeed $dy \approx \Delta y$ as long as $\Delta x$ is small.

**6.** The sides of a cube are found to be 6 feet in length with a possible
error of no more than 1.5 inches. What is the maximum possible error in the
volume of the cube if we use this value of the length of the side to compute the
volume?

**Solution**

First, let's convert the 1.5 inches into 0.125 feet since our input is also
measured in feet. Next, let's recall the Volume of a cube formula:

$$ V = lwh \text{, } w = l = h $$

$$ V(l) = l^3 $$

If we start with $l = 6$ and use $dl \approx \Delta l = 0.125$ then
$\Delta V \approx dV$ should give the maximum error. Let's first find $dV$

$$ dV = 3l^2dl $$

Now compute $dV$:

$$ \boxed{\Delta V \approx dV = 3(6)^2(0.125) = 13.5 \text{ ft}^3} $$

The maximum error in the volume is then approximately $13.5$ ft<sup>3</sup>.

Let's calculate the actual value for $V$:

$$ V(6) = (6)^3 = 216 $$

We can see the percentage error by the following formula:

$$ \frac{\Delta V}{V(6)} \times 100 $$

$$ \frac{13.5}{216}(100) = 6.25\%  $$

---

## Assignment Problems

For problems 1 - 5 compute the differential of the given function.

**1.** $f(x) = 3x^6 - 8x^3 + x^2 - 9x - 4$

**Solution**

Differential formula:

$$ df = f'(x)dx $$

$$ f'(x) = 18x^5 - 24x^2 + 2x - 9 $$

$$ \boxed{df = \left(18x^5 - 24x^2 + 2x - 9\right)dx} $$

**2.** $u = t^2\cos(2t)$

**Solution**

$$ du = \left[(t^2)'(\cos(2t)) + (t^2)(\cos(2t))'\right]dt $$

$$ du = \left[2t\cos(2t) + t^2(-2\sin(2t))\right]dt $$

$$ \boxed{du = \left[2t\cos(2t) - 2t^2\sin(2t)\right]dt} $$

**3.** $y = \mathbf{e}^{\cos(z)}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{dy = \left[-\sin(z)\mathbf{e}^{\cos(z)}\right]dz} $$

**4.** $g(z) = \sin(3z) - \cos(1 - z)$

**Solution**

$$ dg = \left[3\cos(3z) - (-1)(-\sin(1 - z))\right]dz $$

$$ \boxed{dg = \left[3\cos(3z) - \sin(1 - z)\right]dz} $$

**5.** $R(x) = \sqrt[4]{6x + \mathbf{e}^{-x}}$

**Solution**

$$ R(x) = \left(6x + \mathbf{e}^{-x}\right)^{\frac{1}{4}} $$

$$ R'(x) = \frac{1}{4}\left(6x + \mathbf{e}^{-x}\right)^{-\frac{3}{4}}\left(6x + \mathbf{e}^{-x}\right)' $$

$$ R'(x) = \frac{1}{4}\left(6x + \mathbf{e}^{-x}\right)^{-\frac{3}{4}}\left(6 - \mathbf{e}^{-x}\right) $$

$$ R'(x) = \frac{6 - \mathbf{e}^{-x}}{4\sqrt[4]{\left(6x + \mathbf{e}^{-x}\right)^3}} $$

$$ \boxed{dR = \left(\frac{6 - \mathbf{e}^{-x}}{4\sqrt[4]{\left(6x + \mathbf{e}^{-x}\right)^3}}\right)dx} $$

**6.** Compute $dy$ and $\Delta y$ for $y = \sin(x)$ as $x$ changes from $6$
radians to $6.05$ radians.

**Solution**

Recall that:

$$ \Delta y = f(x + \Delta x) - f(x) $$

Thusly we can compute the actual change in $y$, $\Delta y$:

$$ \boxed{\Delta y = \sin(6.05) - \sin(6) \approx 0.0483} $$

Now we'll need to find the formula for $dy$:

$$ dy = \cos(x)dx $$

We can approximate $dx$ by finding $\Delta x$:

$$ dx \approx \Delta x = 6.05 - 6 = 0.05 $$

So $dy$ is rewritten as:

$$ dy = \cos(x)(0.05) $$

And then just plug in the original value of $x$ ($6$):

$$ \boxed{dy = \cos(6)(0.05) \approx 0.0480} $$

And we can see that $dy \approx \Delta y$ as long as $\Delta x$ is small. The
error percentage is negligible.

**7.** Compute $dy$ and $\Delta y$ for $y = \ln\left(x^2 + 1\right)$ as $x$
changes from $-2$ to $-2.1$.

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\Delta y = \ln\left((-2.1)^2 + 1\right) - \ln\left((-2)^2 + 1\right) \approx 0.0788} $$

$$ dy = \left[\frac{2x}{x^2 + 1}\right]dx $$

$$ dx \approx \Delta x = -2.1 - (-2) = -0.1 $$

$$ dy = \left[\frac{2x}{x^2 + 1}\right](-0.1) $$

$$ \boxed{dy = \left[\frac{2(-2)}{(-2)^2 + 1}\right](-0.1) = 0.08} $$

And we can see that $dy \approx \Delta y$ as long as $\Delta x$ is small.

**8.** Compute $dy$ and $\Delta y$ for $y = \dfrac{1}{x - 2}$ as $x$ change from
$3$ to $3.02$.

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\Delta y = \frac{1}{(3.02) - 2} - \frac{1}{(3) - 2} \approx -0.0196} $$

$$ dy = \left[\frac{(1)'(x - 2) - (1)(x - 2)'}{(x - 2)^2}\right]dx $$

$$ dy = \left[-\frac{1}{x^2 - 4x + 4}\right]dx $$

$$ dx \approx \Delta x = 3.02 - 3 = 0.02 $$

$$ dy = \left[-\frac{1}{x^2 - 4x + 4}\right](0.02) $$

$$ \boxed{dy = \left[-\frac{1}{(3)^2 - 4(3) + 4}\right](0.02) \approx -0.02} $$

And we can see that $dy \approx \Delta y$ as long as $\Delta x$ is small.

**9.** Compute $dy$ and $\Delta y$ for $y = x\mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x}$ as $x$
changes from $-10$ to $-9.99$.

**Solution**

$$ \Delta y = (-9.99)\mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}(-9.99)} - (-10)\mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}(-10)} \approx -0.001231787582 $$

$$ dy = \left[(x)'\left(\mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x}\right) + (x)\left(\mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x}\right)'\right]dx $$

$$ dy = \left[\mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x} + x\left(\frac{1}{4}\mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x}\right)\right]dx $$

$$ dy = \left[\mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x}\left(1 + \frac{x}{4}\right)\right]dx $$

$$ dy \approx \Delta x = -9.99 - (-10) = 0.01 $$

$$ dy = \left[\mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x}\left(1 + \frac{x}{4}\right)\right](0.01) $$

$$ dy = \left[\mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}(-10)}\left(1 + \frac{(-10)}{4}\right)\right](0.01) \approx -0.001231274979 $$

So you can see that $dy \approx \Delta y$ as long as $\Delta x$ is small.

**10.** The sides of a cube are found to be 6 feet in length with a possible
error of no more than 1.5 inches. What is the maximum possible error in the
surface area of the cube if we use this value of the length of the side to
compute the surface area?

**Solution**

Firstly let's recall the surface area of a cube formula:

$$ A = 6lw \text{, } l = w $$

$$ A = 6l^2 $$

Now, if we start with $l = 6$ and use
$dl \approx \Delta l = \dfrac{1.5}{12} = 0.125$, then $\Delta A \approx dA$
should give us maximum error.

So, first get the formula for the differential.

$$ dA = (12l)dl $$

$$ dl \approx \Delta l = 0.125 $$

$$ dA = (12l)(0.125) $$

And then plug in the value for $l$ ($l = 6$):

$$ \boxed{dA = (12(6))(0.125) = 9 \text{ ft}^2} $$

If we calculate the error percentage, that is:

$$ \frac{9}{6(6)^2}(100) \approx 4.1667\% $$

**11.** The radius of a circle is found to be 7 cm in length with a possible
error of no more than 0.04 cm. What is the maximum possible error in the area of
the circle if we use this value of the radius to compute the area?

**Solution**

Area of circle formula:

$$ A(r) = \pi r^2 $$

If we start with $r = 7$ and use $dr \approx \Delta r = 0.04$, then
$\Delta A \approx dA$ should give us maximum error.

So, first get the formula for the differential.

$$ dA = (2\pi r)dr $$

$$ dr \approx \Delta r = 0.04 $$

$$ dA = (2\pi r)(0.04) $$

$$ \boxed{dA = (2\pi (7))(0.04) \approx 1.7593 \text{ cm}^2} $$

Let's now calculate the actual $A(7)$ and then calculate the error percentage:

$$ A(7) = \pi(7)^2 \approx 153.9380 \text{ cm}^2  $$

$$ \frac{1.7593}{153.9380}(100) \approx 1.1429\%  $$

**12.** The radius of a sphere is found to be 22 cm in length with a possible
error of no more than 0.07 cm. What is the maximum possible error in the volume
of the sphere if we use this value of the radius to compute the volume?

**Solution**

The volume of a sphere formula:

$$ V(r) = \frac{4}{3}\pi r^3 $$

If we start with $r = 22$ and use $dr \approx \Delta r = 0.07$ then
$\Delta V \approx dV$ should give us maximum error.

So, first get the formula for the differential.

$$ dV = \left(4\pi r^2\right)dr $$

Now compute $dV$:

$$ \boxed{\Delta V \approx dV = 4\pi(22)^2(0.07) \approx 425.7486 \text{ cm}^3} $$

Let's now calculate $V(22)$ and find the error percentage between the actual
value and the approximation.

$$ V(22) = \frac{4}{3}\pi(22)^3 \approx 44602.2381 \text{ cm}^3 $$

$$ \frac{425.7486}{44602.2381}(100) \approx 0.9545\% $$

**13.** The radius of a sphere is found to be $\dfrac{1}{2}$ foot in length with
a possible error of no more than 0.03 inches. What is the maximum possible error
in the surface area of the sphere if we use this value of the radius to compute
the surface area?

**Solution**

The surface area of a sphere formula:

$$ A(r) = 4\pi r^2 $$

If we start with $r = \dfrac{1}{2}$ and use
$dr \approx \Delta r = \dfrac{0.03}{12} = 0.0025$ then $\Delta A \approx dA$
should give us maximum error.

So, first get the formula for the differential.

$$ \boxed{\Delta A \approx dA = \left[8\pi \left(\frac{1}{2}\right)\right](0.0025) \approx 0.0314 \text{ ft}^2} $$

The actual $A\left(\dfrac{1}{2}\right)$ is:

$$ A\left(\frac{1}{2}\right) = 4\pi \left(\frac{1}{2}\right)^2 = \pi \approx 3.1416 \text{ ft}^2 $$

Let's calculate the error percentage:

$$ \frac{0.0314}{3.1416}(100) \approx 0.9995\% $$
