# Section 4.2 : Critical Points

Critical points will show up throughout a majority of this chapter so we first
need to define them and work a few examples before getting into the sections
that actually use them.

**Definition**

> We say that $x = c$ is a critical point of the function $f(x)$ if $f(c)$
> exists and if either of the following are true.
>
> $$ f'(c) = 0 \quad \text{ OR } \quad f'(c) \text{ doesn't exist} $$

Note that we require that $f(c)$ exists in order for $x = c$ to actually be a
critical point. This is an important, and often overlooked, point. What this is
really saying is that all critical points must be in the domain of the function.
If a point is not in the domain of the function then it is not a critical point.

Note as well that, at this point, we only work with real numbers and so any
complex numbers that might arise in finding critical points (and they will arise
on occasion) will be ignored. There are portions of calculus that work a little
differently when working with complex numbers and so in a first calculus class
such as this we ignore complex numbers and only work with real numbers. Calculus
with complex numbers is beyond the scope of this course and is usually taught in
higher level mathematics courses.

The main point of this section is to work some examples finding critical points.
So, let's work some examples.

---

**Example 1** Determine all the critical points for the function.

$$ f(x) = 6x^5 + 33x^4 - 30x^3 + 100 $$

**Solution**

We first need the derivative of the function in order to find the critical
points and so let's get that and notice that we'll factor it as much as possible
to make our life easier when we go to find the critical points.

$$ f'(x) = 30x^4 + 132x^3 - 90x^2 $$

$$ \quad = 6x^2\left(5x^2 + 22x - 15\right) $$

$$ \quad = 6x^2(5x - 3)(x + 5) $$

Now, our derivative is a polynomial and so will exist everywhere. Therefore, the
only critical points will be those values of $x$ which make the derivative zero.
So, we must solve.

$$ 6x^2(5x - 3)(x + 5) = 0 $$

Because this is the factored form of the derivative it's pretty easy to identify
the three critical points. They are,

$$ x = -5 \text{, } x = 0 \text{, } x = \frac{3}{5} $$

---

olynomials are usually fairly simple functions to find critical points for
provided the degree doesn't get so large that we have trouble finding the roots
of the derivative.

Most of the more "interesting" functions for finding critical points aren't
polynomials however. So let's take a look at some functions that require a
little more effort on our part.

---

**Example 2** Determine all the critical points for the function.

$$ g(t) = \sqrt[3]{t^2}(2t - 1) $$

**Solution**

To find the derivative it's probably easiest to do a little simplification
before we actually differentiate. Let's multiply the root through the
parenthesis and simplify as much as possible. This will allow us to avoid using
the product rule when taking the derivative.

$$ g(t) = t^{\frac{2}{3}}(2t - 1) = 2t^{\frac{5}{3}} - t^{\frac{2}{3}} $$

Now differentiate.

$$ g'(t) = \frac{10}{3}t^{\frac{2}{3}} - \frac{2}{3}t^{-\frac{1}{3}} = \frac{10t^{\frac{2}{3}}}{3} - \frac{2}{3t^{\frac{1}{3}}} $$

We will need to be careful with this problem. When faced with a negative
exponent it is often best to eliminate the minus sign in the exponent as we did
above. This isn't really required but it can make our life easier on occasion if
we do that.

Notice as well that eliminating the negative exponent in the second term allows
us to correctly identify why $t = 0$ is a critical point for this function. Once
we move the second term to the denominator we can clearly see that the
derivative doesn’t exist at $t = 0$ and so this will be a critical point. If you
don't get rid of the negative exponent in the second term many people will
incorrectly state that $t = 0$ is a critical point because the derivative is
zero at $t = 0$. While this may seem like a silly point, after all in each case
$t = 0$ is identified as a critical point, it is sometimes important to know why
a point is a critical point. In fact, in a couple of sections we'll see a fact
that only works for critical points in which the derivative is zero.

So, we've found one critical point (where the derivative doesn't exist), but we
now need to determine where the derivative is zero (provided it is of
course...). To help with this it's usually best to combine the two terms into a
single rational expression. So, getting a common denominator and combining gives
us,

$$ g'(t) = \frac{10t - 2}{3t^{\frac{1}{3}}} $$

Notice that we still have $t = 0$ as a critical point. Doing this kind of
combining should never lose critical points, it's only being done to help us
find them. As we can see it's now become much easier to quickly determine where
the derivative will be zero. Recall that a rational expression will only be zero
if its numerator is zero (and provided the denominator isn't also zero at that
point of course).

So, in this case we can see that the numerator will be zero if
$t = \dfrac{1}{5}$ and so there are two critical points for this function.

$$ t = 0 \quad \text{ and } \quad t = \frac{1}{5} $$

---

---

**Example 3** Determine all the critical points for the function.

$$ R(w) = \frac{w^2 + 1}{w^2 - w - 6} $$

**Solution**

We'll leave it to you to verify that using the quotient rule, along with some
simplification, we get that the derivative is,

$$ R'(w) = \frac{-w^2 - 14w + 2}{\left(w^2 - w - 6\right)^2} = -\frac{w^2 + 14w - 1}{\left(w^2 - w - 6\right)^2} $$

Notice that we factored a "-1" out of the numerator to help a little with
finding the critical points. This negative out in front will not affect the
derivative whether or not the derivative is zero or not exist but will make our
work a little easier.

Now, we have two issues to deal with. First the derivative will not exist if
there is division by zero in the denominator. So we need to solve,

$$ w^2 - w - 6 = (w - 3)(w + 2) = 0 $$

We didn't bother squaring this since if this is zero, then zero squared is still
zero and if it isn't zero then squaring it won't make it zero.

So, we can see from this that the derivative will not exist at $w = 3$ and
$w = −2$. However, these are NOT critical points since the function will also
not exist at these points. Recall that in order for a point to be a critical
point the function must actually exist at that point.

At this point we need to be careful. The numerator doesn't factor, but that
doesn't mean that there aren’t any critical points where the derivative is zero.
We can use the quadratic formula on the numerator to determine if the fraction
as a whole is ever zero.

$$ w = \frac{-14 \pm \sqrt{(14)^2 - 4(1)(-1)}}{2(1)} = \frac{-14 \pm \sqrt{200}}{2} = \frac{-14 \pm 10\sqrt{2}}{2} = -7 \pm 5\sqrt{2} $$

So, we get two critical points. Also, these are not "nice" integers or
fractions. This will happen on occasion. Don’t get too locked into answers
always being "nice". Often they aren't.

Note as well that we only use real numbers for critical points. So, if upon
solving the quadratic in the numerator, we had gotten complex number these would
not have been considered critical points.

Summarizing, we have two critical points. They are,

$$ w = -7 + 5\sqrt{2} \text{, } w = -7 - 5\sqrt{2} $$

Again, remember that while the derivative doesn’t exist at $w = 3$ and $w = −2$
neither does the function and so these two points are not critical points for
this function.

---

In the previous example we had to use the quadratic formula to determine some
potential critical points. We know that sometimes we will get complex numbers
out of the quadratic formula. Just remember that, as mentioned at the start of
this section, when that happens we will ignore the complex numbers that arise.

So far all the examples have not had any trig functions, exponential functions,
_etc._ in them. We shouldn't expect that to always be the case. So, let's take a
look at some examples that don't just involve powers of $x$.

---

**Example 4** Determine all the critical points for the function.

$$ y = 6x - 4\cos(3x) $$

**Solution**

First get the derivative and don't forget to use the chain rule on the second
term.

$$ y' = 6 + 12\sin(3x) $$

Now, this will exist everywhere and so there won't be any critical points for
which the derivative doesn't exist. The only critical points will come from
points that make the derivative zero. We will need to solve,

$$ 6 + 12\sin(3x) = 0 $$

$$ \sin(3x) = -\frac{1}{2} $$

Solving this equation gives the following.

$$ 3x = 3.6652 + 2\pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

$$ 3x = 5.7596 + 2\pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

Don't forget the $2\pi n$ on these! There will be problems down the road in
which we will miss solutions without this! Also make sure that it gets put on at
this stage! Now divide by 3 to get all the critical points for this function.

$$ x = 1.2217 + \frac{2\pi n}{3} \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

$$ x = 1.9199 + \frac{2\pi n}{3} \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

---

Notice that in the previous example we got an infinite number of critical
points. That will happen on occasion so don't worry about it when it happens.

---

**Example 5** Determine all the critical points for the function.

$$ h(t) = 10t\mathbf{e}^{3 - t^2} $$

**Solution**

Here's the derivative for this function.

$$ h'(t) = 10\mathbf{e}^{3 - t^2} + 10t\mathbf{e}^{3 - t^2}(-2t) = 10\mathbf{e}^{3 - t^2} - 20t^2\mathbf{e}^{3 - t^2} $$

Now, this looks unpleasant, however with a little factoring we can clean things
up a little as follows

$$ h'(t) = 10\mathbf{e}^{3 - t^2}\left(1 - 2t^2\right) $$

This function will exist everywhere, so no critical points will come from the
derivative not existing. Determining where this is zero is easier than it looks.
We know that exponentials are never zero and so the only way the derivative will
be zero is if,

$$ 1 - 2t^2 = 0 $$

$$ 1 = 2t^2 $$

$$ \frac{1}{2} = t^2 $$

We will have two critical points for this function.

$$ t = \pm \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} $$

---

---

**Example 6** Determine all the critical points for the function.

$$ f(x) = x^2\ln(3x) + 6 $$

**Solution**

Before getting the derivative let’s notice that since we can’t take the log of a
negative number or zero we will only be able to look at $x > 0$.

The derivative is then,

$$ f'(x) = 2x\ln(3x) + x^2\left(\frac{3}{3x}\right) $$

$$ \quad = 2x\ln(3x) + x $$

$$ \quad = x(2\ln(3x) + 1) $$

Now, this derivative will not exist if $x$ is a negative number of if $x = 0$,
but then again neither will the function and so these are not critical points.
Remeber that the function will only exist if $x > 0$ and nicely enough the
derivative will also only exist if $x > 0$ and so the only thing we need to
worry about is where the derivative is zero.

First note that, despite appearances, the derivative will not be zero for
$x = 0$. As noted above the derivative doesn’t exist at $x = 0$ because of the
natural logarithm and so the derivative can't be zero there!

So, the derivative will only be zero if,

$$ 2\ln(3x) + 1 = 0 $$

$$ \ln(3x) = -\frac{1}{2} $$

Recall that we can solve this by exponentiating both sides.

$$ \mathbf{e}^{\ln(3x)} = \mathbf{e}^{-\frac{1}{2}} $$

$$ 3x = \mathbf{e}^{-\frac{1}{2}} $$

$$ x = \frac{1}{3}\mathbf{e}^{-\frac{1}{2}} = \frac{1}{3\sqrt{\mathbf{e}}} $$

There is a single critical point for this function.

---

Let's work one more problem to make a point.

---

**Example 7** Determine all the critical points for the function.

$$ f(x) = x\mathbf{e}^{x^2} $$

**Solution**

Note that this function is not much different from the function used in
Example 5. In this case the derivative is,

$$ f'(x) = \mathbf{e}^{x^2} + x\mathbf{e}^{x^2}(2x) = \mathbf{e}^{x^2}\left(1 + 2x^2\right) $$

This function will never be zero for any real value of $x$. The exponential is
never zero of course and the polynomial will only be zero if $x$ is complex and
recall that we only want real values of $x$ for critical points.

Therefore, this function will not have any critical points.

---

It is important to note that not all functions will have critical points! In
this course most of the functions that we will be looking at do have critical
points. That is only because those problems make for more interesting examples.
Do not let this fact lead you to always expect that a function will have
critical points. Sometimes they don't as this final example has shown.

---

## Practice Problems

Determine the critical points of each of the following functions.

**1.** $f(x) = 8x^3 + 81x^2 - 42x - 8$

**Solution**

**2.** $R(t) = 1 + 80t^3 + 5t^4 - 2t^5$

**Solution**

**3.** $g(w) = 2w^3 - 7w^2 - 3w - 2$

**Solution**

**4.** $g(x) = x^6 - 2x^5 + 8x^4$

**Solution**

**5.** $h(z) = 4z^3 - 3z^2 + 9z + 12$

**Solution**

**6.** $Q(x) = (2 - 8x)^4\left(x^2 - 9\right)^3$

**Solution**

**7.** $f(z) = \dfrac{z + 4}{2z^2 + z + 8}$

**Solution**

**8.** $R(x) = \dfrac{1 - x}{x^2 + 2x - 15}$

**Solution**

**9.** $r(y) = \sqrt[5]{y^2 - 6y}$

**Solution**

**10.** $h(t) = 15 - (3 - t)\left[t^2 - 8t + 7\right]^{\frac{1}{3}}$

**Solution**

**11.** $s(z) = 4\cos(z) - z$

**Solution**

**12.** $f(y) = \sin\left(\dfrac{y}{3}\right) + \dfrac{2y}{9}$

**Solution**

**13.** $V(t) = \sin^2(3t) + 1$

**Solution**

**14.** $f(x) = 5x\mathbf{e}^{9 - 2x}$

**Solution**

**15.** $g(w) = \mathbf{e}^{w^3 - 2w^2 - 7w}$

**Solution**

**16.** $R(x) = \ln\left(x^2 + 4x + 14\right)$

**Solution**

**17.** $A(t) = 3t - 7\ln(8t + 2)$

**Solution**

---

## Assignment Problems

For problems 1 - 43 determine the critical points of each of the following
functions. Note that a couple of the problems involve equations that may not be
easily solved by hand and as such may require some computational aids. These are
marked are noted below.

**1.** $R(x) = 8x^3 - 18x^2 - 240x + 2$

**Solution**

**2.** $f(z) = 2z^4 - 16z^3 + 20z^2 - 7$

**Solution**

**3.** $g(z) = 8 - 12z^5 - 25z^6 + \dfrac{90}{7}z^7$

**Solution**

**4.** $g(t) = 3t^4 - 20t^3 - 132t^2 + 672t - 4$

Note : Depending upon your factoring skills this may require some computational
aids.

**Solution**

**5.** $h(x) = 10x^2 - 15x^3 + \dfrac{15}{2}x^4 - x^5$

Note : Depending upon your factoring skills this may require some computational
aids.

**Solution**

**6.** $P(w) = w^3 - 4w^2 - 7w - 1$

**Solution**

**7.** $A(t) = 7t^3 - 3t^2 + t - 15$

**Solution**

**8.** $a(t) = 4 - 2t^2 - 6t^3 - 3t^4$

**Solution**

**9.** $f(x) = 3x^4 - 20x^3 + 6x^2 + 120x + 5$

Note : Depending upon your factoring skills this may require some computational
aids.

**Solution**

**10.** $h(v) = v^5 + v^4 + 10v^3 - 15$

**Solution**

**11.** $g(z) = (z - 3)^5(2z + 1)^4$

**Solution**

**12.** $R(q) = (q + 2)^4\left(q^2 - 8\right)^2$

**Solution**

**13.** $f(t) = (t - 2)^3\left(t^2 + 1\right)^2$

**Solution**

**14.** $f(w) = \dfrac{w^2 + 2w + 1}{3w - 5}$

**Solution**

**15.** $h(t) = \dfrac{3 - 4t}{t^2 + 1}$

**Solution**

**16.** $R(y) = \dfrac{y^2 - y}{y^2 + 3y + 8}$

**Solution**

**17.** $Y(x) = \sqrt[3]{x - 7}$

**Solution**

**18.** $f(t) = \left(t^3 - 25t\right)^{\frac{2}{3}}$

**Solution**

**19.** $h(x) = \sqrt[5]{x}(2x + 8)^2$

**Solution**

**20.** $Q(w) = \left(6 - w^2\right)\sqrt[3]{w^2 - 4}$

**Solution**

**21.** $Q(t) = 7\sin\left(\dfrac{t}{4}\right) - 2$

**Solution**

**22.** $g(x) = 3\cos(2x) - 5x$

**Solution**

**23.** $f(x) = 7\cos(x) + 2x$

**Solution**

**24.** $h(t) = 6\sin(2t) + 12t$

**Solution**

**25.** $w(z) = \cos^3\left(\dfrac{z}{5}\right)$

**Solution**

**26.** $U(z) = \tan(z) - 4z$

**Solution**

**27.** $h(x) = x\cos(x) - \sin(x)$

**Solution**

**28.** $h(x) = 2\cos(x) - \cos(2x)$

**Solution**

**29.** $f(w) = \cos^2(w) - \cos^4(w)$

**Solution**

**30.** $F(w) = \mathbf{e}^{14w + 3}$

**Solution**

**31.** $g(z) = z^2\mathbf{e}^{1 - z}$

**Solution**

**32.** $A(x) = (3 - 2x)\mathbf{e}^{x^2}$

**Solution**

**33.** $P(t) = (6t + 1)\mathbf{e}^{8t - t^2}$

**Solution**

**34.** $f(x) = \mathbf{e}^{3 + x^2} - \mathbf{e}^{2x^2 - 4}$

**Solution**

**35.** $f(z) = \mathbf{e}^{z^2 - 4z} + \mathbf{e}^{8z - 2z^2}$

**Solution**

**36.** $h(y) = \mathbf{e}^{6y^3 - 8y^2}$

**Solution**

**37.** $g(t) = \mathbf{e}^{2t^3 + 4t^2 - t}$

**Solution**

**38.** $Z(t) = \ln\left(t^2 + t + 3\right)$

**Solution**

**39.** $G(r) = r - \ln\left(r^2 + 1\right)$

**Solution**

**40.** $A(z) = 2 - 6z + \ln(8z + 1)$

**Solution**

**41.** $f(x) = x - 4\ln\left(x^2 + x + 2\right)$

**Solution**

**42.** $g(x) = \ln(4x + 2) - \ln(x + 4)$

**Solution**

**43.** $h(t) = \ln\left(t^2 - t + 1\right) + \ln(4 - t)$

**Solution**

**44.** The graph of some function, $f(x)$, is shown. Based on the graph,
estimate the location of all the critical points of the function.

![image 4.2_1](./4.2_1.png)

**Solution**

**45.** The graph of some function, $f(x)$, is shown. Based on the graph,
estimate the location of all the critical points of the function.

![image 4.2_2](./4.2_2.png)

**46.** The graph of some function, $f(x)$, is shown. Based on the graph,
estimate the location of all the critical points of the function.

![image 4.2_3](./4.2_3.png)
