# 3.2 Lines

In mathematics, a _Line_ can be defined by the following formula:

$$ Ax + By = C $$

As long as _both_ $x$ and $y$ are not $0$.

Note that it is okay if $x$ is $0$ as long as $y$ is not $0$ and visa versa.

This is what is known as the **standard form** of the line.

One of the more important ideas that we'll be discussing in this section is that
of **slope**. The slope of a line is a measure of the _steepness_ of a line and
it can also be used to measure whether a line is increasing or decreasing as we
move from left to right. Here is the precise definition of the slope of the
line.

Give any two points on the line, say $(x_1, y_1)$ and $(x_2, y_2)$, the slope of
the line is given by,

$$ m = \frac{y_2 - y_1}{x_2 - x_1} $$

In other words, the slope is the difference in the $y$ values divided by the
difference in the $x$ values. Also, do not get worried about the subscripts on
the variables. These are used fairly regularly from this point on and are simply
used to denote the fact that the variables are both $x$ or $y$ values but are,
in all likelihood, different.

When using this definition do not worry about which point should be the first
point and which point should be the second point. You can choose either to be
the first and/or second and we'll get exactly the same value for the slope.

There is also a geometric "definition" of the slope of the line as well. You
will often hear the slope as being defined as follows,

$$ m = \frac{\text{rise}}{\text{run}} $$

The two definitions are identical as the following diagrams illustrates. The
numerators and denominators of both definitions are the same.

![Chapter 3.2 Image 1](./3.2_1.png)

Note as well that if we have the slope (written as a fraction) and a pointo n
the line, say $(x_1, y_1)$, then we can easily find a second point that is also
on the line. Before seeing how this canb e done let's take the convention that
if the slope is negative we will put the minus sign on the numerator of the
slope. In other words, we will assume that the _rise_ is negative if the slope
is negative. Note as well that a neative _rise_ is really a _fall_.

So, we have the slope, written as a fraction, and a point on the line,
$(x_1, y_1)$. To get the coordinates of the second point, $(x_2, y_2)$ all that
we need to do is start at $(x_1, y_1)$ then move to the right by the _run_ (or
the denominator of the slope) and then up/down by _rise_ (or the numerator of
the slope) dependingo n the sign of the _rise_. We can also write down some
equations for the coordinates of the second point as follows,

$$ x_2 = x_1 + \text{run} $$

$$ y_2 = y_1 + \text{rise} $$

Note that if the slope is negative then the _rise_ will be a negative number.

Let's compute a couple of slopes.

---

**Example 1**

Determine the slope of each of the following lines. Sketch the graph of each
line.

**(a)**

The line that contains the two points $(-2, -3)$ and $(3, 1)$.

$$ m = \frac{1 - (-3)}{3 - (-2)} $$

$$ m = \frac{4}{5} $$

![Chapter 3.2 Image 2](./3.2_2.png)

**(b)**

The line that contains the two points $(-1, 5)$ and $(0, -2)$.

$$ m = \frac{(-2) - 5}{0 - (-1)} $$

$$ m = \frac{-7}{1} $$

$$ m = -7 $$

![Chapter 3.2 Image 3](./3.2_3.png)

**(c\)**

The line that contains the two points $(-3, 2)$ and $(5, 2)$.

$$ m = \frac{2 - 2}{5 - (-3)} $$

$$ m = \frac{0}{8} $$

$$ m = 0 $$

![Chapter 3.2 Image 4](./3.2_4.png)

**(d)**

The line that contains the two points $(4, 3)$ and $(4, -2)$.

$$ m = \frac{(-2) - 3}{4 - 4} $$

$$ m = \frac{-5}{0} = \text{undefined}$$

![Chapter 3.2 Image 5](./3.2_5.png)

---

We can use this set of examples to see some general facts about lines.

First, we can see from the first two parts that the larger the number (ignoring
any minus signs) the steeper the line. So, we can use the slope to tell us
something about just how steep a line is.

Next, we can see that if the slope is a positive number then the line will be
increasing as we move from left to right. Likewise, if the slope is a negative
number then the line will decrease as we move from left to right.

We can use the final two parts to see what the slopes of horizontal and vertical
lines will be. A horizontal line will always have a slope of zero and a vertical
line will alway shave an undefined scope.

We now need to take a look at some special forms of the equation of the line.

We will start off with horizontal and vertical lines. A horizontal line with a
$y$-intercept of $b$ will have the equation,

$$ y = b $$

Likewise, a vertical line with an $x$-intercept of $a$ will have the equation,

$$ x = a $$

So, if we go back and look at the last two parts of the previous examples we can
see that the equation of the line for the horizontal line in the third part is

$$ y = 2 $$

while the equation for the vertical line in the fourth part is

$$ x = 4 $$

The next special form of the line that we need to look at is the **point-slope
form** of the line. This form is very useful for writing down the equation of a
line. If we know that a line passes through the point $(x_1, y_1)$ and has a
slope of $m$ then the point-slope form of the equation of the line is,

$$ y - y_1 = m(x - x_1) $$

Sometimes this is written as,

$$ y = y_1 + m(x - x_1) $$

The form it's written in usually depends on the instructor that is teaching the
class.

As stated earlier this form is particularly useful for writing down the equation
of a line so let's take a look at an example of this.

---

**Example 2**

Write down the equation of the line that passes through two points $(-2, 4)$ and
$(3, -5)$.

First, let's determine the slope:

$$ m = \frac{-5 - 4}{3 - (-2)}  $$

$$ m = -\frac{9}{5} $$

Now, we can use either point to determine the equation of the line. We'll use
both to demonstrate:

First, let's use $(-2, 4)$.

$$ y = 4 - \frac{9}{5}(x - (-2)) $$

$$ yn = 4 - \frac{9}{5}(x + 2) $$

Now, let's use $(3, -5)$.

$$ y = -5 - \frac{9}{5}(x - 3) $$

These look different, but in reality they are the same equation. We simply need
to distribute the slope through the parenthesis and then simplify.

Here is the first equation using $(-2, 4)$:

$$ y = 4 - \frac{9}{5}(x + 2) $$

$$ y = 4 - \frac{9}{5}x - \frac{18}{5} $$

$$ y = -\frac{9}{5} + \frac{2}{5} $$

And the second equation using $(3, -5)$:

$$ y = -5 -\frac{9}{5}(x - 3)  $$

$$ y = -5 - \frac{9}{5}x + \frac{27}{5} $$

$$ y = -\frac{9}{5}x + \frac{2}{5} $$

And sure enough, they are the same equation.

---

The final special form of the equation of the line is probably the one that most
people are familiar with. It is the **slope-intercept form**. In this case if we
know that a line has slope $m$ and has a $y$-intercept of $(0, b)$ then the
slope-itnercept form of the equation of the line is,

$$ y = mx + b $$

This form is particularly useful for graphing lines. Let's take a look at a
couple of examples.
