# Section 3.9 : Chain Rule

We've taken a lot of derivatives over the course of the last few sections.
However, if you look back they have all been functions similar to the following
kinds of functions.

$$ R(z) = \sqrt{z} \quad f(t) = t^{50} \quad y = \tan(x) \quad h(w) = \mathbf{e}^w \quad g(x) = \ln x $$

These are all fairly simple functions in that wherever the variable appears it
is by itself. What about functions like the following,

$$ R(z) = \sqrt{5z - 8} \quad f(t) = \left(2t^3 + \cos(t)\right)^{50} \quad y = \tan\left(\sqrt[3]{3x^2} + \tan(5x)\right)$$

$$ h(w) = \mathbf{e}^{w^4 - 3w^2 + 9} \quad g(x) = \ln\left(x^{-4} + x^4\right) $$

None of our rules will work on these functions and yet some of these functions
are closer to the derivatives that we’re liable to run into than the functions
in the first set.

Let’s take the first one for example. Back in the
[**section**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/DefnOfDerivative.aspx#Deriv_Defn_Ex3)
on the definition of the derivative we actually used the definition to compute
this derivative. In that section we found that,

$$ R'(z) = \frac{5}{2\sqrt{5z - 8}} $$

If we were to just use the power rule on this we would get,

$$ \frac{1}{2}(5z - 8)^{-\frac{1}{2}} = \frac{1}{2\sqrt{5z - 8}} $$

which is not the derivative that we computed using the definition. It is close,
but it’s not the same. So, the power rule alone simply won't work to get the
derivative here.

Let’s keep looking at this function and note that if we define,

$$ f(z) = \sqrt{z} \quad g(z) = 5z - 8 $$

then we can write the function as a composition.

$$ R(z) = (f \circ g)(z) = f(g(z)) = \sqrt{5z - 8} $$

and it turns out that it’s actually fairly simple to differentiate a function
composition using the **Chain Rule**. There are two forms of the chain rule.
Here they are.

**Chain Rule**

> Suppose that we have two functions $f(x)$ and $g(x)$ and they are both
> differentiable.
>
> 1. If we define $F(x) = (f \circ g)(x)$ then the derivative of $F(x)$ is,
>    $$ F'(x) = f'(g(x)) \quad g'(x) $$
> 2. If we have $y = f(u)$ and $u = g(x)$ then the derivative of $y$ is,
>    $$ \frac{dy}{dx} = \frac{dy}{dx} \quad \frac{du}{dx} $$

Each of these forms have their uses, however we will work mostly with the first
form in this class. To see the proof of the Chain Rule see the
[**Proof of Various
Derivative Formulas**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/DerivativeProofs.aspx#Extras_DerPf_ChainRule)
section of the Extras chapter.

Now, let’s go back and use the Chain Rule on the function that we used when we
opened this section.

---

**Example 1** Use the Chain Rule to differentiate $R(z) = \sqrt{5z - 8}$.

We've already identified the two functions that we needed for the composition,
but let's write them back down anyway and take their derivatives.

$$ f(z) = \sqrt{z} \quad g(z) = 5z - 8 $$

$$ f'(z) = \frac{1}{2\sqrt{z}} \quad g'(z) = 5 $$

So, using the chain rule we get,

$$ R'(z) = f'(g(z)) \quad g'(z) $$

$$ \quad = f'(5z - 8) \quad g'(z) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}(5z - 8)^{-\frac{1}{2}}(5) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2\sqrt{5z - 8}}(5) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{5}{2\sqrt{5z - 8}} $$

And this is what we got using the definition of the derivative.

---

In general, we don't really do all the composition stuff in using the Chain
Rule. That can get a little complicated and in fact obscures the fact that there
is a quick and easy way of remembering the chain rule that doesn't require us to
think in terms of function composition.

Let’s take the function from the previous example and rewrite it slightly.

$$ R(z) = \underbrace{(5z - 8)}_{\text{inside function}} \quad \underbrace{\text{}^\frac{1}{2}}_{\text{outside function}} $$

This function has an "inside function" and an "outside function". The outside
function is the square root or the exponent of $\dfrac{1}{2}$ depending on how
you want to think of it and the inside function is the stuff that we’re taking
the square root of or raising to the $\dfrac{1}{2}$, again depending on how you
want to look at it.

The derivative is then,

$$ R'(z) = \overbrace{\frac{1}{2} \quad \underbrace{(5z - 8)}_{\text{inside function left alone}} \quad \text{}^{-\frac{1}{2}}}^{\text{derivative of outside function}} \quad \underbrace{(5)}_{\text{derivative of inside function}} $$

In general, this is how we think of the chain rule. We identify the "inside
function"" and the "outside function". We then differentiate the outside
function leaving the inside function alone and multiply all of this by the
derivative of the inside function. In its general form this is,

$$ F'(x) = \quad \underbrace{f'}_{\text{derivative of outside function}} \quad \underbrace{(g(x))}_{\text{inside function left alone}} \quad \underbrace{g'(x)}_{\text{times derivative of inside function}} $$

We can always identify the "outside function" in the examples below by asking
ourselves how we would evaluate the function. For instance in the $R(z)$ case if
we were to ask ourselves what $R(2)$ is we would first evaluate the stuff under
the radical and then finally take the square root of this result. The square
root is the last operation that we perform in the evaluation and this is also
the outside function. The outside function will always be the last operation you
would perform if you were going to evaluate the function.

Let's take a look at some examples of the Chain Rule.

---

**Example 2** Differentiate each of the following.

**(a)** $f(x) = \sin\left(3x^2 + x\right)$

**Solution**

It looks like the outside function is the sine and the inside function is
$3x^2 + x$. The derivative is then.

$$ f'(x) = \quad \underbrace{\cos}_{\text{derivative of outside function}} \quad \underbrace{\left(3x^2 + x\right)}_{\text{leave inside function alone}} \quad \underbrace{(6x + 1)}_{\text{times derivative of inside function}} $$

Or with a little rewriting,

$$ f'(x) = (6x + 1)\cos\left(3x^2 + x\right) $$

**(b)** $f(t) = \left(2t^3 + \cos(t)\right)^{50}$

**Solution**

In this case the outside function is the exponent of $50$ and the inside
function is all the stuff on the inside of the parenthesis. The derivative is
then.

$$ f'(t) = 50\left(2t^3 + \cos(t)\right)^{49}\left(6t^2 - \sin(t)\right) $$

$$ \quad = 50\left(6t^2 - \sin(t)\right)\left(2t^3 + \cos(t)\right)^{49} $$

**\(c\)** $h(w) = \mathbf{e}^{w^4 - 3w^2 + 9}$

**Solution**

Identifying the outside function in the previous two was fairly simple since it
really was the "outside" function in some sense. In this case we need to be a
little careful. Recall that the outside function is the last operation that we
would perform in an evaluation. In this case if we were to evaluate this
function the last operation would be the exponential. Therefore, the outside
function is the exponential function and the inside function is its exponent.

Here’s the derivative.

$$ h'(w) = \mathbf{e}^{w^4 - 3w^2 + 9}\left(4w^3 - 6w\right) $$

$$ \quad = \left(4w^3 - 6w\right)\mathbf{e}^{w^4 - 3w^2 + 9} $$

Remember, we leave the inside function alone when we differentiate the outside
function. So, the derivative of the exponential function (with the inside left
alone) is just the original function.

**(d)** $g(x) = \ln\left(x^{-4} + x^4\right)$

**Solution**

Here the outside function is the natural logarithm and the inside function is
stuff on the inside of the logarithm.

$$ g'(w) = \frac{1}{x^{-4}+ x^4}\left(-4x^{-5} + 4x^3\right) = \frac{-4x^{-5} + 4x^3}{x^{-4} + x^4} $$

Again remember to leave the inside function alone when differentiating the
outside function. So, upon differentiating the logarithm we end up not with
$\dfrac{1}{x}$ but instead with $\dfrac{1}{(\text{inside function})}$.

**(e)** $y = \sec(1 - 5x)$

**Solution**

In this case the outside function is the secant and the inside is the $1 - 5x$.

$$ y' = \sec(1 - 5x)\tan(1 - 5x)(-5) $$

$$ \quad = -5\sec(1 - 5x)\tan(1 - 5x) $$

In this case the derivative of the outside function is $\sec(x)\tan(x)$.
However, since we leave the inside function alone we don’t get $x$'s in both.
Instead we get $1 - 5x$ in both.

**(f)** $P(t) = \cos^4(t) + \cos\left(t^4\right)$

**Solution**

There are two points to this problem. First, there are two terms and each will
require a different application of the chain rule. That will often be the case
so don't expect just a single chain rule when doing these problems. Second, we
need to be very careful in choosing the outside and inside function for each
term.

Recall that the first term can actually be written as,

$$ \cos^4(t) = \left(\cos(t)\right)^4 $$

So, in the first term the outside function is the exponent of $4$ and the inside
function is the cosine. In the second term it’s exactly the opposite. In the
second term the outside function is the cosine and the inside function is $t^4$.
Here's the derivative for this function.

$$ P'(t) = 4\cos^3(t)(-\sin(t)) - \sin(t^4)(4t^3) $$

$$ \quad = -4\sin(t)\cos^3(t) - 4t^3\sin(t^4) $$

---

There are a couple of general formulas that we can get for some special cases of
the chain rule. Let's take a quick look at those.

---

**Example 3** Differentiate each of the following.

**(a)** $f(x) = [g(x)]^n$

**Solution**

The outside function is the exponent and the inside is $g(x)$.

$$ f'(x) = n[g(x)]^{n -1}g'(x) $$

**(b)** $f(x) = \mathbf{e}^{g(x)}$

**Solution**

The outside function is the exponential function and the inside is $g(x)$.

$$ f'(x) = g'(x)\mathbf{e}^{g(x)} $$

**\(c\)** $f(x) = \ln(g(x))$

**Solution**

The outside function is the logarithm and the inside is $g(x)$.

$$ f'(x) = \frac{1}{g(x)}g'(x) = \frac{g'(x)}{g(x)} $$

---

The formulas in this example are really just special cases of the Chain Rule but
may be useful to remember in order to quickly do some of these derivatives.

Now, let's also not forget the other rules that we've got for doing derivatives.
For the most part we'll not be explicitly identifying the inside and outside
functions for the remainder of the problems in this section. We will be assuming
that you can see our choices based on the previous examples and the work that we
have shown.

---

**Example 4** Differentiate each of the following.

**(a)** $T(x) = \tan^{-1}(2x)\sqrt[3]{1 - 3x^2}$

**Solution**

Let's first notice that this problem is first and foremost a product rule
problem. This is a product of two functions, the inverse tangent and the root
and so the first thing we'll need to do in taking the derivative is use the
product rule. However, in using the product rule and each derivative will
require a chain rule application as well.

$$ T'(x) = \frac{1}{1 + (2x)^2}(2)\left(1 - 3x^2\right)^{\frac{1}{3}} + \tan^{-1}(2x)\left(\frac{1}{3}\right)\left(1 - 3x^2\right)^{-\frac{2}{3}}(-6x) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{2\left(1 - 3x^2\right)^{\frac{1}{3}}}{1 + (2x)^2} - 2x\left(1 - 3x^2\right)^{-\frac{2}{3}}\tan^{-1}(2x) $$

In this part be careful with the inverse tangent. We know that,

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\left(\tan^{-1}x\right) = \frac{1}{1 + x^2} $$

When doing the chain rule with this we remember that we've got to leave the
inside function alone. That means that where we have the $x^2$ in the derivative
of $\tan^{-1}x$ we will need to have $(\text{inside function})^2$.

**(b)** $f(z) = \sin\left(z\mathbf{e}^z\right)$

**Solution**

Now contrast this with the previous problem. In the previous problem we had a
product that required us to use the chain rule in applying the product rule. In
this problem we will first need to apply the chain rule and when we go to
differentiate the inside function we'll need to use the product rule.

Here is the chain rule portion of the problem.

$$ f'(z) = \cos\left(z\mathbf{e}^z\right)\frac{d}{dz}\left[z\mathbf{e}^z\right] $$

In this case we did not actually do the derivative of the inside yet. We just
left it in the derivative notation to make it clear that in order to do the
derivative of the inside function we now have a product rule.

Here is the rest of the work for this problem.

$$ f'(z) = \cos\left(z\mathbf{e}^z\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^z + z\mathbf{e}^z\right) $$

**\(c\)** $y = \dfrac{\left(x^3 + 4\right)^5}{\left(1 - 2x^2\right)^3}$

**Solution**

For this problem we clearly have a rational expression and so the first thing
that we'll need to do is apply the quotient rule. In the process of using the
quotient rule we'll need to use the chain rule when differentiating the
numerator and denominator.

$$ y' = \frac{5\left(x^3 + 4\right)^4\left(3x^2\right)\left(1 - 2x^2\right)^3 - \left(x^3 + 4\right)^5(3)\left(1 - 2x^2\right)^2(-4x)}{\left(\left(1 - 2x^2\right)^3\right)^2} $$

These tend to be a little messy. Notice that when we go to simplify that we'll
be able to a fair amount of factoring in the numerator and this will often
greatly simplify the derivative.

$$ y' = \frac{\left(x^3 + 4\right)^4\left(1 - 2x^2\right)^2\left(5\left(3x^2\right)\left(1 - 2x^2\right) - \left(x^3 + 4\right)(3)(-4x)\right)}{\left(1 - 2x^2\right)^6} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{3x\left(x^3 + 4\right)^4\left(5x - 6x^3 + 16\right)}{\left(1 - 2x^2\right)^4} $$

After factoring we were able to cancel some of the terms in the numerator
against the denominator. So even though the initial chain rule was fairly messy
the final answer is significantly simpler because of the factoring.

**(d)** $h(t) = \left(\dfrac{2t + 3}{6 - t^2}\right)^3$

**Solution**

Unlike the previous problem the first step for derivative is to use the chain
rule and then once we go to differentiate the inside function we'll need to do
the quotient rule.

Here is the work for this problem.

$$ h'(t) = 3\left(\frac{2t + 3}{6 - t^2}\right)^2\frac{d}{dt}\left[\frac{2t + 3}{6 - t^2}\right] $$

$$ \quad = 3\left(\frac{2t + 3}{6 - t^2}\right)^2\left[\frac{2\left(6 - t^2\right) - (2t + 3)(-2t)}{\left(6 - t^2\right)^2}\right] $$

$$ \quad = 3\left(\frac{2t + 3}{6 - t^2}\right)^2\left[\frac{2t^2 + 6t + 12}{\left(6 - t^2\right)^2}\right] $$

As with the second part above we did not initially differentiate the inside
function in the first step to make it clear that it would be quotient rule from
that point on.

---

There were several points in the last example. First is to not forget that we've
still got other derivatives rules that are still needed on occasion. Just
because we now have the chain rule does not mean that the product and quotient
rule will no longer be needed.

In addition, as the last example illustrated, the order in which they are done
will vary as well. Some problems will be product or quotient rule problems that
involve the chain rule. Other problems however, will first require the use the
chain rule and in the process of doing that we'll need to use the product and/or
quotient rule.

Most of the examples in this section won't involve the product or quotient rule
to make the problems a little shorter. However, in practice they will often be
in the same problem so you need to be prepared for these kinds of problems.

Now, let’s take a look at some more complicated examples.

---

**Example 5** Differentiate each of the following.

**(a)** $h(z) = \dfrac{2}{\left(4z + \mathbf{e}^{-9z}\right)^{10}}$

**Solution**

In this case let's first rewrite the function in a form that will be a little
easier to deal with.

$$ h(z) = 2\left(4z + \mathbf{e}^{-9z}\right)^{-10} $$

Now, let's start the derivative.

$$ h'(z) = -20\left(4z + \mathbf{e}^{-9z}\right)^{-11}\frac{d}{dz}\left(4z + \mathbf{e}^{-9z}\right) $$

Notice that we didn't actually do the derivative of the inside function yet.
This is to allow us to notice that when we do differentiate the second term we
will require the chain rule again. Notice as well that we will only need the
chain rule on the exponential and not the first term. In many functions we will
be using the chain rule more than once so don't get excited about this when it
happens.

Let's go ahead and finish this example out.

$$ h'(z) = -20\left(4z + \mathbf{e}^{-9z}\right)^{-11}\left(4 - 9\mathbf{e}^{-9z}\right) $$

Be careful with the second application of the chain rule. Only the exponential
gets multiplied by the "$-9$" since that's the derivative of the inside function
for that term only. One of the more common mistakes in these kinds of problems
is to multiply the whole thing by the "$-9$" and not just the second term.

**(b)** $f(y) = \sqrt{2y + \left(3y + 4y^2\right)^3}$

**Solution**

We'll not put as many words into this example, but we’re still going to be
careful with this derivative so make sure you can follow each of the steps here.

$$ f(y) = \frac{1}{2}\left(2y + \left(3y + 4y^2\right)^3\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\frac{d}{dy}\left(2y + \left(3y + 4y^2\right)^3\right) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\left(2y + \left(3y + 4y^2\right)^3\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(2 + 3\left(3y + 4y^2\right)^2(3 + 8y)\right) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\left(2y + \left(3y + 4y^2\right)^3\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(2 + (9 + 24y)\left(3y + 4y^2\right)^2\right) $$

As with the first example the second term of the inside function required the
chain rule to differentiate it. Also note that again we need to be careful when
multiplying by the derivative of the inside function when doing the chain rule
on the second term.

**\(c\)** $y = \tan\left(\sqrt[3]{3x^2} + \ln\left(5x^4\right)\right)$

**Solution**

Let’s jump right into this one.

$$ y' = \sec^2\left(\sqrt[3]{3x^2} + \ln\left(5x^4\right)\right)\frac{d}{dx}\left(\left(3x^2\right)^{\frac{1}{3}} + \ln\left(5x^4\right)\right) $$

$$ \quad = \sec^2\left(\sqrt[3]{3x^2} + \ln\left(5x^4\right)\right)\left(\frac{1}{3}\left(3x^2\right)^{-\frac{2}{3}}(6x) + \frac{20x^3}{5x^4}\right) $$

$$ \quad = \left(2x\left(3x^2\right)^{-\frac{2}{3}} + \frac{4}{x}\right)\sec^2\left(\sqrt[3]{3x^2} + \ln\left(5x^4\right)\right) $$

In this example both of the terms in the inside function required a separate
application of the chain rule.

**(d)** $g(t) = \sin^3\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - t} + 3\sin(6t)\right)$

**Solution**

We'll need to be a little careful with this one.

$$ g'(t) = 3\sin^2\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - t} + 3\sin(6t)\right)\frac{d}{dt}\sin\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - t} + 3\sin(6t)\right) $$

$$ \quad = 3\sin^2\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - t} + 3\sin(6t)\right)\cos\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - t} + 3\sin(6t)\right)\frac{d}{dt}\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - t} + 3\sin(6t)\right) $$

$$ \quad = 3\sin^2\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - t} + 3\sin(6t)\right)\cos\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - t} + 3\sin(6t)\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - t}(-1) + 3\cos(6t)(6)\right)$$

$$ \quad = 3\left(-\mathbf{e}^{1 - t} + 18\cos(6t)\right)\sin^2\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - t} + 3\sin(6t)\right)\cos\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - t} + 3\sin(6t)\right) $$

This problem required a total of 4 chain rules to complete.

---

Sometimes these can get quite unpleasant and require many applications of the
chain rule. Initially, in these cases it's usually best to be careful as we did
in this previous set of examples and write out a couple of extra steps rather
than trying to do it all in one step in your head. Once you get better at the
chain rule you'll find that you can do these fairly quickly in your head.

Finally, before we move onto the next section there is one more issue that we
need to address. In the
[**Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithm Functions**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/DiffExpLogFcns.aspx)
section we claimed that,

$$ f(x) = a^x \quad \Rightarrow \quad f'(x) = a^x\ln(a) $$

but at the time we didn't have the knowledge to do this. We now do. What we
needed was the chain rule.

First, notice that using a property of logarithms we can write $a$ as,

$$ a = \mathbf{e}^{\ln a} $$

This may seem kind of silly, but it is needed to compute the derivative. Now,
using this we can write the function as,

$$ f(x) = a^x $$

$$ \quad = (a)^x $$

$$ \quad = \left(\mathbf{e}^{\ln a}\right)^x $$

$$ \quad = \mathbf{e}^{(\ln a)x} $$

$$ \quad = \mathbf{e}^{x \ln a} $$

Okay, now that we've gotten that taken care of all we need to remember is that
$a$ is a constant and so $\ln a$ is also a constant. Now, differentiating the
final version of this function is a (hopefully) fairly simple Chain Rule
problem.

$$ f'(x) = \mathbf{e}^{x \ln a}(\ln a) $$

Now, all we need to do is rewrite the first term back as $a^x$ to get,

$$ f'(x) = a^x\ln(a) $$

So, not too bad if you can see the trick to rewriting the $a$ and with using the
Chain Rule.

---

## Practice Problems

For problems 1 – 27 differentiate the given function.

**1.** $f(x) = \left(6x^2 + 7x\right)^4$

**Solution**

$$ f'(x) = 4(6x^2 + 7x)^3\frac{d}{dx}(6x^2 + 7x) $$

$$ \boxed{f'(x) = 4(12x + 7)(6x^2 + 7x)^3} $$

**2.** $g(t) = \left(4t^2 - 3t + 2\right)^{-2}$

**Solution**

$$ g'(t) = -2\left(4t^2 - 3t + 2\right)^{-3}\frac{d}{dx}\left(4t^2 - 3t + 2\right) $$

$$ g'(t) = -2\left(4t^2 - 3t + 2\right)^{-3}(8t - 3) $$

$$ \boxed{g'(t) = -2(8t - 3)\left(4t^2 - 3t + 2\right)^{-3}} $$

**3.** $y = \sqrt[3]{1 - 8z}$

**Solution**

$$ y = (1 - 8z)^{\frac{1}{3}} $$

$$ \frac{dy}{dz} = \frac{1}{3}(1 - 8z)^{-\frac{2}{3}}(1 - 8z)' $$

$$ \frac{dy}{dz} = \frac{1}{3}(1 - 8z)^{-\frac{2}{3}}(-8) $$

$$ \boxed{\frac{dy}{dz} = -\frac{8}{3}(1 - 8z)^{-\frac{2}{3}}} $$

**4.** $R(w) = \csc(7w)$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{d}{dx}(\csc(x)) = -\csc(x)\cot(x) $$

$$ R'(w) = -\csc(7w)\cot(7w)(7w)' $$

$$ \boxed{R'(w) = -7\csc(7w)\cot(7w)} $$

**5.** $G(x) = 2\sin\left(3x + \tan(x)\right)$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\sin(x) = \cos(x) $$

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\tan(x) = \sec^2(x) $$

$$ G(x)' = 2\cos(3x + \tan(x))\frac{d}{dx}(3x + \tan(x)) $$

$$ G(x)' = 2\cos(3x + \tan(x))(3 + \sec^2(x)) $$

$$ \boxed{G(x)' = 2(3 + \sec^2(x))\cos(3x + \tan(x))} $$

**6.** $h(u) = \tan(4 + 10u)$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\tan(x) = \sec^2(x) $$

$$ h'(u) = \sec^2(4 + 10u)\frac{d}{du}(4 + 10u) $$

$$ h'(u) = \sec^2(4 + 10u)(0 + 10) $$

$$ \boxed{h'(u) = 10\sec^2(4 + 10u)} $$

**7.** $f(t) = 5 + \mathbf{e}^{4t + t^7}$

**Solution**

$$ f'(t) = (5)' + \mathbf{e}^{4t + t^7}\frac{d}{dt}(4t + t^7) $$

$$ f'(t) = \mathbf{e}^{4t + t^7}(4 + 7t^6) $$

$$ \boxed{f'(t) = (4 + 7t^6)\mathbf{e}^{4t + t^7}} $$

**8.** $g(x) = \mathbf{e}^{1 - \cos(x)}$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\cos(x) = -\sin(x) $$

$$ g'(x) = \mathbf{e}^{1 - \cos(x)}\frac{d}{dx}(1 - \cos(x)) $$

$$ g'(x) = \mathbf{e}^{1 - \cos(x)}(0 - (-\sin(x))) $$

$$ g'(x) = \mathbf{e}^{1 - \cos(x)}\sin(x) $$

$$ \boxed{g(x) = \sin(x)\mathbf{e}^{1 - \cos(x)}} $$

**9.** $H(z) = 2^{1 - 6z}$

**Solution**

$$ H'(z) = \ln(2)\left(2^{1 - 6z}\right)\frac{d}{dz}(1 - 6z) $$

$$ H'(z) = \ln(2)\left(2^{1 - 6z}\right)(-6) $$

$$ H'(z) = -6\ln(2)\left(2^{1 - 6z}\right) $$

**10.** $u(t) = \tan^{-1}(3t - 1)$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\left(\tan^{-1}(x)\right) = \frac{1}{1 + x^2} $$

$$ u'(t) = \frac{1}{1 + (3t - 1)^2}\frac{d}{dt}(3t - 1) $$

$$ u'(t) = \frac{1}{1 + (3t - 1)^2}(3) $$

$$ \boxed{u'(t) = \frac{3}{1 + (3t - 1)^2}} $$

**11.** $F(y) = \ln\left(1 - 5y^2 + y^3\right)$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{d}{dx}(\ln x) = \frac{1}{x} $$

$$ F'(y) = \frac{1}{1 - 5y^2 + y^3}\frac{d}{dy}\left(1 - 5y^2 + y^3\right) $$

$$ F'(y) = \frac{1}{1 - 5y^2 + y^3}\left(-10y + 3y^2\right) $$

$$ \boxed{F'(y) = \frac{-10y + 3y^2}{1 - 5y^2 + y^3}} $$

**12.** $V(x) = \ln\left(\sin(x) - \cot(x)\right)$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{d}{dx}(\ln x) =\frac{1}{x}  $$

$$ \frac{d}{dx}(\cot(x)) = -\csc^2(x) $$

$$ \frac{d}{dx}(\sin(x)) = \cos(x) $$

$$ V'(x) = \frac{1}{\sin(x) - \cot(x)}\frac{d}{dx}(\sin(x) - \cot(x)) $$

$$ V'(x) = \frac{1}{\sin(x) - \cot(x)}(\cos(x) - (-\csc^2(x))) $$

$$ V'(x) = \frac{1}{\sin(x) - \cot(x)}(\cos(x) + \csc^2(x)) $$

$$ \boxed{V'(x) = \frac{\cos(x) + \csc^2(x)}{\sin(x) - \cot(x)}} $$

**13.** $h(z) = \sin\left(z^6\right) + \sin^6(z)$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{d}{dx}(\sin(x)) = \cos(x) $$

$$ h(z) = \cos(z^6)(z^6)' + 6\sin^5(z)(\sin(z))' $$

$$ h(z) = \cos(z^6)(6z^5) + 6\sin^5(z)(\cos(z)) $$

$$ \boxed{h(z) = 6z^5\cos(z^6) + 6\sin^5(z)\cos(z)} $$

**14.** $S(w) = \sqrt{7w} + \mathbf{e}^{-w}$

**Solution**

$$ S(w) = (7w)^{\frac{1}{2}} + \mathbf{e}^{-w} $$

$$ S'(w) = \frac{1}{2}(7)(7w)^{-\frac{1}{2}} - \mathbf{e}^{-w} $$

$$ \boxed{S'(w) = \frac{7}{2}(7w)^{-\frac{1}{2}} - \mathbf{e}^{-w}} $$

**15.** $g(z) = 3z^7 - \sin\left(z^2 + 6\right)$

**Solution**

$$ g'(z)= 7(3)z^{7 - 1} - \cos(z^2 + 6)\frac{d}{dz}(z^2 + 6) $$

$$ g'(z)= 21z^{6} - \cos(z^2 + 6)(2z) $$

$$ g'(z)= 21z^{6} - 2z\cos(z^2 + 6) $$

**16.** $f(x) = \ln\left(\sin(x)\right) - \left(x^4 - 3x\right)^{10}$

**Solution**

$$ f'(x) = \frac{1}{\sin(x)}\frac{d}{dx}(\sin(x)) - 10\left(x^4 - 3x\right)^9\frac{d}{dx}(x^4 - 3x) $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{1}{\sin(x)}(\cos(x)) - 10\left(x^4 - 3x\right)^9(4x^3 - 3) $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{\cos(x)}{\sin(x)} - 10\left(x^4 - 3x\right)^9(4x^3 - 3) $$

$$ \boxed{f'(x) = \cot(x) - 10(4x^3 - 3)\left(x^4 - 3x\right)^9} $$

**17.** $h(t) = t^6\sqrt{5t^2 - t}$

**Solution**

$$ h(t) = t^6\left(5t^2 - t\right)^{\frac{1}{2}} $$

$$ h'(t) = \frac{d}{dt}(t^6)(5t^2 - t)^{\frac{1}{2}} + (t^6)\frac{d}{dt}(5t^2 - t)^{\frac{1}{2}}\frac{d}{dt}(5t^2 - t) $$

$$ h'(t) = 6t^5(5t^2 - t)^{\frac{1}{2}} + t^6\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)(5t^2 - t)^{\frac{1}{2} - 1}(10t - 1) $$

$$ h'(t) = 6t^5(5t^2 - t)^{\frac{1}{2}} +\frac{1}{2}t^6(5t^2 - t)^{-\frac{1}{2}}(10t - 1) $$

$$ \boxed{h'(t) = 6t^5(5t^2 - t)^{\frac{1}{2}} +\frac{1}{2}t^6(10t - 1)(5t^2 - t)^{-\frac{1}{2}}} $$

**18.** $q(t) = t^2\ln\left(t^5\right)$

**Solution**

$$ q'(t) = \frac{d}{dt}(t^2)\left(\ln\left(t^5\right)\right) + (t^2)\frac{d}{dt}\left(\ln\left(t^5\right)\right)\frac{d}{dt}(t^5) $$

$$ q'(t) = 2t\ln\left(t^5\right) + t^2\left(\frac{1}{t^5}\right)(5t^4) $$

$$ q'(t) = 2t\ln\left(t^5\right) + \frac{5t^6}{t^5} $$

$$ \boxed{q'(t) = 2t\ln\left(t^5\right) + 5t} $$

**19.** $g(w) = \cos(3w)\sec(1 - w)$

**Solution**

$$ g'(w) = \frac{d}{dw}(\cos(3w))\frac{d}{dw}(3w)(\sec(1 - w)) + (\cos(3w))\frac{d}{dw}(\sec(1 - w))\frac{d}{dw}(1 - w) $$

$$ g'(w) = -\sin(3w)(3)(\sec(1 - w)) + \cos(3w)\sec(1 - w)\tan(1 - w)(-1) $$

$$ \boxed{g'(w) = -3\sin(3w)(\sec(1 - w)) - \cos(3w)\sec(1 - w)\tan(1 - w)} $$

**20.** $y = \dfrac{\sin(3t)}{1 + t^2}$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{dy}{dt} = \frac{\dfrac{d}{dy}(\sin(3t))\dfrac{d}{dy}(3t)(1 + t^2) - (\sin(3t))\dfrac{d}{dy}(1 + t^2)}{(1 + t^2)^2} $$

$$ \frac{dy}{dt} = \frac{\cos(3t)(3)(1 + t^2) - \sin(3t)(2t)}{(1 + t^2)^2} $$

$$ \frac{dy}{dt} = \frac{3\cos(3t)(1 + t^2) - 2t\sin(3t)}{(1 + t^2)^2} $$

**21.** $K(x) = \dfrac{1 + \mathbf{e}^{-2x}}{x + \tan(12x)}$

**Solution**

$$ K'(x) = \frac{(1 + \mathbf{e}^{-2x})'(x + \tan(12x)) - (1 + \mathbf{e}^{-2x})(x + \tan(12x))'}{(x + \tan(12x))^2} $$

$$ K'(x) = \frac{(0 + \mathbf{e}^{-2x}(-2x)')(x + \tan(12x)) - (1 + \mathbf{e}^{-2x})(1 + \sec^2(12x)(12x)')}{(x + \tan(12x))^2} $$

$$ K'(x) = \frac{((-2)\mathbf{e}^{-2x})(x + \tan(12x)) - (1 + \mathbf{e}^{-2x})(1 + \sec^2(12x)(12))}{(x + \tan(12x))^2} $$

$$ \boxed{K'(x) = \frac{-2\mathbf{e}^{-2x}(x + \tan(12x)) - (1 + \mathbf{e}^{-2x})(1 + 12\sec^2(12x))}{(x + \tan(12x))^2}} $$

**22.** $f(x) = \cos\left(x^2\mathbf{e}^x\right)$

**Solution**

$$ f'(x) = -\sin\left(x^2\mathbf{e}^x\right)\frac{d}{dx}\left(x^2\mathbf{e}^x\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = -\sin\left(x^2\mathbf{e}^x\right)\left[(x^2)'(\mathbf{e}^x) + (x^2)(\mathbf{e}^x)'\right]$$

$$ f'(x) = -\sin\left(x^2\mathbf{e}^x\right)\left(2x\mathbf{e}^x + x^2\mathbf{e}^x\right) $$

$$ \boxed{f'(x) = -\left(2x\mathbf{e}^x + x^2\mathbf{e}^x\right)\sin\left(x^2\mathbf{e}^x\right)} $$

**23.** $z = \sqrt{5x + \tan(4x)}$

**Solution**

$$ z = (5x + \tan(4x))^{\frac{1}{2}} $$

$$ \frac{dz}{dx} = \frac{1}{2}\left(5x + \tan(4x)\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\frac{d}{dx}\left(5x + \tan(4x)\right) $$

$$ \frac{dz}{dx} = \frac{1}{2}\left(5x + \tan(4x)\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(5 + \sec^2(4x)(4x)'\right) $$

$$ \frac{dz}{dx} = \frac{1}{2}\left(5x + \tan(4x)\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(5 + \sec^2(4x)(4)\right) $$

$$ \boxed{\frac{dz}{dx} = \frac{1}{2}\left(5x + \tan(4x)\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(5 + 4\sec^2(4x)\right)} $$

**24.** $f(t) = \left(\mathbf{e}^{-6t} + \sin(2 - t)\right)^3$

**Solution**

$$ f'(t) = 3\left(\mathbf{e}^{-6t} + \sin(2 - t)\right)^2\frac{d}{dt}\left(\mathbf{e}^{-6t} + \sin(2 - t)\right) $$

$$ f'(t) = 3\left(\mathbf{e}^{-6t} + \sin(2 - t)\right)^2\left(-6\mathbf{e}^{-6t} + \cos(2 - t)(2 - t)'\right) $$

$$ f'(t) = 3\left(\mathbf{e}^{-6t} + \sin(2 - t)\right)^2\left(-6\mathbf{e}^{-6t} + \cos(2 - t)(-1)\right) $$

$$ \boxed{f'(t) = 3\left(\mathbf{e}^{-6t} + \sin(2 - t)\right)^2\left(-6\mathbf{e}^{-6t} - \cos(2 - t)\right)} $$

**25.** $g(x) = \left(\ln\left(x^2 + 1\right) - \tan^{-1}(6x)\right)^{10}$

**Solution**

$$ g'(x) = 10\left(\ln\left(x^2 + 1\right) - \tan^{-1}(6x)\right)^9\frac{d}{dx}\left(\ln\left(x^2 + 1\right) - \tan^{-1}(6x)\right) $$

$$ g'(x) = 10\left(\ln\left(x^2 + 1\right) - \tan^{-1}(6x)\right)^9\left(\left(\frac{1}{x^2 + 1}\right)\left(\frac{d}{dx}(x^2 + 1)\right) - \frac{1}{1 + (6x)^2}\left(\frac{d}{dx}(6x)\right)\right) $$

$$ g'(x) = 10\left(\ln\left(x^2 + 1\right) - \tan^{-1}(6x)\right)^9\left(\frac{1}{x^2 + 1}(2x) - \frac{1}{1 + 36x^2}(6)\right) $$

$$ g'(x) = 10\left(\ln\left(x^2 + 1\right) - \tan^{-1}(6x)\right)^9\left(\frac{2x}{x^2 + 1} - \frac{6}{1 + 36x^2}\right) $$

**26.** $h(z) = \tan^4\left(z^2 + 1\right)$

**Solution**

$$ h'(z) = 4\tan^3(z^2 + 1)\frac{d}{dz}\left[\tan\left(z^2 + 1\right)\right] $$

$$ h'(z) = 4\tan^3(z^2 + 1)\sec^2\left(z^2 + 1\right)\frac{d}{dz}\left(z^2 + 1\right) $$

$$ h'(z) = 4\tan^3(z^2 + 1)\sec^2\left(z^2 + 1\right)(2z) $$

$$ \boxed{h'(z) = 8z\tan^3(z^2 + 1)\sec^2\left(z^2 + 1\right)} $$

**27.** $f(x) = \left(\sqrt[3]{12x} + \sin^2(3x)\right)^{-1}$

**Solution**

$$ f'(x) = -1\left(\sqrt[3]{12x} + \sin^2(3x)\right)^{-2}\frac{d}{dx}\left(\sqrt[3]{12x} + \sin^2(3x)\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = -1\left(\sqrt[3]{12x} + \sin^2(3x)\right)^{-2}\frac{d}{dx}\left((12x)^{\frac{1}{3}} + \sin^2(3x)\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = -1\left(\sqrt[3]{12x} + \sin^2(3x)\right)^{-2}\left(\frac{1}{3}(12x)^{-\frac{2}{3}}(12x)' + 2\sin(3x)(\sin(3x))'\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = -1\left(\sqrt[3]{12x} + \sin^2(3x)\right)^{-2}\left(\frac{1}{3}(12x)^{-\frac{2}{3}}(12) + 2\sin(3x)(\cos(3x))(3x)'\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = -1\left(\sqrt[3]{12x} + \sin^2(3x)\right)^{-2}\left(\frac{1}{3}(12x)^{-\frac{2}{3}}(12) + 2\sin(3x)(\cos(3x))(3)\right) $$

$$ \boxed{f'(x) = -\left(\sqrt[3]{12x} + \sin^2(3x)\right)^{-2}\left(4(12x)^{-\frac{2}{3}} + 6\sin(3x)\cos(3x)\right)} $$

**28.** Find the tangent line to $f(x) = 4\sqrt{2x} - 6\mathbf{e}^{2 - x}$ at
$x = 2$.

**Solution**

$$ f(x) = 4(2x)^{\frac{1}{2}} - 6\mathbf{e}^{2 - x} $$

$$ f'(x) = 2(2x)^{-\frac{1}{2}}(2x)' - 6\mathbf{e}^{2 - x}(2 - x)' $$

$$ f'(x) = 2(2x)^{-\frac{1}{2}}(2) - 6\mathbf{e}^{2 - x}(-1) $$

$$ f'(x) = 4\left(\frac{1}{(2x)^{\frac{1}{2}}}\right) + 6\mathbf{e}^{2 - x} $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{4}{\sqrt{2x}} + 6\mathbf{e}^{2 - x} $$

$$ f(2) = 4\sqrt{2(2)} - 6\mathbf{e}^{2 - 2} $$

$$ f(2) = 4(2) - 6(1) $$

$$ f(2) = 8 - 6 $$

$$ f(2) = 2 $$

$$ f'(2) = \frac{4}{\sqrt{2(2)}}+ 6\mathbf{e}^{2 - (2)} $$

$$ f'(2) = \frac{4}{2} + 6(1) $$

$$ f'(2) = 2 + 6 $$

$$ f'(2) = 8 $$

$$ y = f(a) + f'(a)(x - a) $$

$$ y = 2 + 8(x - 2) $$

$$ y = 2 + 8x - 16 $$

$$ \boxed{y = 8x - 14} $$

**29.** Determine where $V(z) = z^4(2z - 8)^3$ is increasing and decreasing.

**Solution**

$$ V'(z) = \left[(z^4)'\left[(2z - 8)^3\right] + (z^4)\left[(2z - 8)^3\right]'\right] $$

$$ V'(z) = \left[(4z^3)\left[(2z - 8)^3\right] + (z^4)\left[3(2z - 8)^2(2z - 8)'\right]\right] $$

$$ V'(z) = 4z^3(2z - 8)^3 + z^4\left[3(2z - 8)^2(2)\right] $$

$$ V'(z) = 4z^3(2z - 8)^3 + z^4\left[6(2z - 8)^2\right] $$

$$ V'(z) = 4z^3(2z - 8)^3 + 6z^4(2z - 8)^2 $$

$$ V'(z) = z^3\left[4(2z - 8)^3\right] + z^3\left[6z(2z - 8)^2\right] $$

$$ V'(z) = z^3\left[\left(4(2z - 8)^3\right) + \left(6z(2z - 8)^2\right)\right] $$

$$ V'(z) = (2z - 8)^2z^3[4(2z - 8) + 6z] $$

$$ V'(z) = (2z - 8)^2z^3[8z - 32 + 6z] $$

$$ V'(z) = (2z - 8)^2z^3[14z - 32] $$

$$ V'(z) = 2(2z - 8)^2z^3[7z - 16] $$

$$ V'(z) = 2z^3(2z - 8)^2(7z - 16) $$

$$ 2z^3(2z - 8)^2(7z - 16) = 0 $$

$$ 2z^3 = 0 $$

$$ z^3 = 0 $$

$$ z = 0 $$

$$ 2z - 8 = 0 $$

$$ 2z = 8 $$

$$ z = 4 $$

$$ 7z - 16 = 0 $$

$$ 7z = 16 $$

$$ z = \frac{16}{7} \approx 2.2857 $$

So we have potential sign changes at $z = 0, z = 4, z = \dfrac{16}{7}$.

$$ -\infty < z < 0 \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ 0 <  z < \frac{16}{7}  \quad \text{ negative} $$

$$ \frac{16}{7} < z < 4  \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ 4 < z < \infty  \quad \text{ positive} $$

So we can say that:

$$ V(t) \text{ is increasing at : } -\infty < z < 0 \quad \& \quad \frac{16}{7} < z < 4 \quad \& \quad 4 < z < \infty $$

$$ V(t) \text{ is decreasing at : } 0 < z < \frac{16}{7} $$

**30.** The position of an object is given by $s(t) = \sin(3t) - 2t + 4$.
Determine where in the internval $[0, 3]$ the object is moving to the right and
moving to the left.

**Solution**

$$ s'(t) = \cos(3t)(3t)' - (2t)' + 0 $$

$$ s'(t) = 3\cos(3t) - 2 $$

$$ 3\cos(3t) - 2 = 0 $$

$$ 3\cos(3t) = 2 $$

$$ \cos(3t) = \frac{2}{3} $$

$$ 3t = \cos^{-1}\left(\frac{2}{3}\right) \approx 0.8411 $$

Cosine is positive in Quadrants I and IV, and thusly can be ascertained within
the first rotation of the Unit Circle as two positions:

$$ 3t = 0 + 0.8411 $$

$$ 3t = 2\pi - 0.8411 = 5.4421 $$

$$ 3t = 0.8411 + 2\pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

$$ t = 0.2804 + \frac{2\pi n}{3} \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

$$ 3t = 5.4421 + 2\pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

$$ t = 1.8140 + \frac{2\pi n}{3} \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

Both of these values for $t$ the first rotation of $t$ fall within the range of
$[0, 3]$. Also if we plug in $n = 1$ for $t = 0.2804 + \dots$, we get another
value, $2.3748$ that falls within this range as well.

$$ t = 0.2804, t = 1.8140, t = 2.3748 $$

This gives us the values at which our function potentially changes signs, we
just have to check within the range instead of at infinities like in the last
problem:

$$ 0 \leq t < 0.2804  \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ 0.2804 < t < 1.8140 \quad \text{ negative} $$

$$ 1.8140 < t < 2.3748 \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ 2.3748 < t \leq 3 \quad \text{ negative} $$

We say that the object is moving right when the interval's output is positive,
and moving left when the interval's output is negative. Thusly:

$$ \text{moving right : } 0 \leq t < 0.2804 \quad \& \quad 1.8140 < t < 2.3748 $$

$$ \text{moving left : } 0.2804 < t < 1.8140 \quad \& \quad 2.3748 < t \leq 3 $$

**31.** Determine where $A(t) = t^2\mathbf{e}^{5 - t}$ is increasing and
decreasing.

**Solution**

$$ A'(t) = (t^2)'(\mathbf{e}^{5 - t}) + (t^2)(\mathbf{e}^{5 - t})' $$

$$ A'(t) = (2t)(\mathbf{e}^{5 - t}) + (t^2)(\mathbf{e}^{5 - t})(5 - t)' $$

$$ A'(t) = (2t)(\mathbf{e}^{5 - t}) + (t^2)(\mathbf{e}^{5 - t})(-1) $$

$$ A'(t) = 2t\mathbf{e}^{5 - t} - t^2\mathbf{e}^{5 - t}$$

$$ A'(t) = t\mathbf{e}^{5 - t}(2 - t)$$

$$ t\mathbf{e}^{5 - t}(2 - t) = 0 $$

$$ t = 0 $$

$$ 2 - t = 0 $$

$$ t = 2 $$

This gives us the intervals where $A(t)$ could change signs.

There is no range given, so we check against infinities:

$$ -\infty < t < 0 \quad \text{ negative} $$

$$ 0 < t < 2 \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ 2 < t < \infty \quad \text{ negative} $$

So we can say:

$$ \text{increasing : } 0 < t < 2 $$

$$ \text{decreasing : } -\infty < t < 0 \quad \& \quad 2 < t < \infty $$

**32.** Determine where in the interval $[-1, 20]$ the function
$f(x) = \ln\left(x^4 + 20x^3 + 100\right)$ is increasing and decreasing.

$$ f'(x) = \frac{1}{x^4 + 20x^3 + 100}(x^4 + 20x^3 + 100)' $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{1}{x^4 + 20x^3 + 100}(4x^3 + 60x^2 + 0) $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{4x^3 + 60x^2}{x^4 + 20x^3 + 100} $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{4x^2(x + 15)}{x^4 + 20x^3 + 100} $$

$$ \frac{4x^2(x + 15)}{x^4 + 20x^3 + 100} = 0 $$

$$ 4x^2(x + 15) = 0 $$

$$ 4x^2 = 0 $$

$$ x = 0 $$

$$ x + 15 = 0 $$

$$ x = -15 $$

Note that we should be concerned about what happens if $x^4 + 20x^3 + 100 = 0$.

Also note that $x = -15$ falls outside the range of $[-1, 20]$, so we don't need
to input this into our evaluation.

$$ -1 \leq x < 0 \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ 0 < x \leq 20 \quad \text{ positive} $$

And so we can say that:

$$ \text{increasing : } -1 \leq x < 0 \quad \& \quad 0 < x \leq 20$$

$$ \text{decreasing : } \emptyset $$

---

## Assignment Problems

For problems 1 – 51 differentiate the given function.

**1.** $g(x) = (3 - 8x)^{11}$

**Solution**

$$ g'(x) = 11(3 - 8x)^{10}(3 - 8x)' $$

$$ g'(x) = 11(3 - 8x)^{10}(0 - 8) $$

$$ \boxed{g'(x) = -88(3 - 8x)^{10}} $$

**2.** $g(z) = \sqrt[7]{9z^3}$

**Solution**

$$ g(z) = (9z^3)^{\frac{1}{7}} $$

$$ g'(z) = \frac{1}{7}(9z^3)^{-\frac{6}{7}}(9z^3)' $$

$$ g'(z) = \frac{1}{7}(9z^3)^{-\frac{6}{7}}(27z^2) $$

$$ \boxed{g'(z) = \frac{27z^2}{7}(9z^3)^{-\frac{6}{7}}} $$

**3.** $h(t) = \left(9 + 2t - t^3\right)^6$

**Solution**

$$ h'(t) = 6\left(9 + 2t - t^3\right)^5(9 + 2t - t^3)' $$

$$ h'(t) = 6\left(9 + 2t - t^3\right)^5(0 + 2 - 3t^2)' $$

$$ \boxed{h'(t) = 6(2 - 3t^2)\left(9 + 2t - t^3\right)^5} $$

**4.** $y = \sqrt{w^3 + 8w^2}$

**Solution**

$$ y = \left(w^3 + 8w^2\right)^{\frac{1}{2}} $$

$$ \frac{dy}{dw} = \frac{1}{2}\left(w^3 + 8w^2\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(w^3 + 8w^2\right)' $$

$$ \frac{dy}{dw} = \frac{1}{2}\left(w^3 + 8w^2\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(3w^2 + 16w\right) $$

$$ \boxed{\frac{dy}{dw} = \frac{1}{2}\left(3w^2 + 16w\right)\left(w^3 + 8w^2\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}} $$

**5.** $R(v) = \left(14v^2 - 3v\right)^{-2}$

**Solution**

$$ R'(v) = -2\left(14v^2 - 3v\right)^{-3}\left(14v^2 - 3v\right)' $$

$$ R'(v) = -2\left(14v^2 - 3v\right)^{-3}\left(28v - 3\right) $$

$$ \boxed{R'(v) = -2\left(28v - 3\right)\left(14v^2 - 3v\right)^{-3}} $$

**6.** $H(w) = \dfrac{2}{(6 - 5w)^8}$

**Solution**

$$ H'(w) = \frac{(2)'\left[(6 - 5w)^8\right] - (2)\left[(6 - 5w)^8\right]'}{\left[(6 - 5w)^8\right]^2} $$

$$ H'(w) = \frac{(0)\left[(6 - 5w)^8\right] - 2\left[8(6 - 5w)^7(6 - 5w)'\right]}{(6 - 5w)^{16}} $$

$$ H'(w) = \frac{-2\left[8(6 - 5w)^7(0 - 5)\right]}{(6 - 5w)^{16}} $$

$$ H'(w) = \frac{10\left[8(6 - 5w)^7\right]}{(6 - 5w)^{16}} $$

$$ H'(w) = \frac{80(6 - 5w)^7}{(6 - 5w)^{16}} $$

$$ \boxed{H'(w) = \frac{80}{(6 - 5w)^9}} $$

**7.** $f(x) = \sin\left(4x + 7x^4\right)$

**Solution**

$$ f'(x) = \cos\left(4x + 7x^4\right)\left(4x + 7x^4\right)' $$

$$ f'(x) = \cos\left(4x + 7x^4\right)\left(4 + 24x^3\right) $$

$$ \boxed{f'(x) = \left(4 + 24x^3\right)\cos\left(4x + 7x^4\right)} $$

**8.** $T(x) = \tan\left(1 - 2\mathbf{e}^x\right)$

**Solution**

$$ T'(x) = \sec^2\left(1 - 2\mathbf{e}^x\right)\left(1 - 2\mathbf{e}^x\right)' $$

$$ T'(x) = \sec^2\left(1 - 2\mathbf{e}^x\right)\left(0 - 2\mathbf{e}^x\right) $$

$$ \boxed{T'(x) = -2\mathbf{e}^x\sec^2\left(1 - 2\mathbf{e}^x\right)} $$

**9.** $g(z) = \cos\left(\sin(z) + z^2\right)$

**Solution**

$$ g'(z) = -\sin\left(\sin(z) + z^2\right)\left(\sin(z) + z^2\right)' $$

$$ g'(z) = -\sin\left(\sin(z) + z^2\right)\left(\cos(z) + 2z\right) $$

$$ \boxed{g'(z) = -\left(\cos(z) + 2z\right)\sin\left(\sin(z) + z^2\right)} $$

**10.** $h(u) = \sec\left(u^2 - u\right)$

**Solution**

$$ h'(u) = \sec\left(u^2 - u\right)\tan\left(u^2 - u\right)\left(u^2 - u\right)' $$

$$ h'(u) = \sec\left(u^2 - u\right)\tan\left(u^2 - u\right)\left(2u - 1\right) $$

$$ \boxed{h'(u) = \left(2u - 1\right)\sec\left(u^2 - u\right)\tan\left(u^2 - u\right)} $$

**11.** $y = \cot(1 + \cot(x))$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{dy}{dx} = -\csc(1 + \cot(x))(1 + \cot(x))' $$

$$ \frac{dy}{dx} = -\csc(1 + \cot(x))(0 + (-\csc(x))) $$

$$ \boxed{\frac{dy}{dx} = \csc(x)\csc(1 + \cot(x))} $$

**12.** $f(t) = \mathbf{e}^{1 - t^2}$

**Solution**

$$ f'(t) = \mathbf{e}^{1 - t^2}\left(1 - t^2\right)' $$

$$ f'(t) = \mathbf{e}^{1 - t^2}\left(0 - 2t\right) $$

$$ \boxed{f'(t) = -2t\mathbf{e}^{1 - t^2}} $$

**13.** $J(z) = \mathbf{e}^{12z - z^6}$

**Solution**

$$ J'(z) = \mathbf{e}^{12z - z^6}\left(12z - z^6\right)' $$

$$ J'(z) = \mathbf{e}^{12z - z^6}\left(12 - 6z^5\right) $$

$$ \boxed{J'(z) = \left(12 - 6z^5\right)\mathbf{e}^{12z - z^6}} $$

**14.** $f(z) = \mathbf{e}^{z + \ln(z)}$

**Solution**

$$ f'(z) = \mathbf{e}^{z + \ln(z)}\left(z + \ln(z)\right)' $$

$$ f'(z) = \mathbf{e}^{z + \ln(z)}\left(1 + \frac{1}{z}\right) $$

$$ \boxed{f'(z) = \left(1 + \frac{1}{z}\right)\mathbf{e}^{z + \ln(z)}} $$

**15.** $B(x) = 7^{\cos(x)}$

**Solution**

**16.** $z = 3^{x^2 - 9x}$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{dz}{dx} = 3^{x^2 - 9x}\ln(3)\left(x^2 - 9x\right)' $$

$$ \frac{dz}{dx} = 3^{x^2 - 9x}\ln(3)\left(2x - 9\right) $$

$$ \boxed{\frac{dz}{dx} = \left(2x - 9\right)3^{x^2 - 9x}\ln(3)} $$

**17.** $R(z) = \ln\left(6z + \mathbf{e}^z\right)$

**Solution**

$$ R'(z) = \frac{1}{6z + \mathbf{e}^z}\left(6z + \mathbf{e}^z\right)' $$

$$ R'(z) = \frac{1}{6z + \mathbf{e}^z}\left(6 + \mathbf{e}^z\right) $$

$$ \boxed{R'(z) = \frac{6 + \mathbf{e}^z}{6z + \mathbf{e}^z}} $$

**18.** $h(w) = \ln\left(w^7 - w^5 + w^3 - w\right)$

**Solution**

$$ h'(w) = \frac{1}{w^7 - w^5 + w^3 - w}\left(w^7 - w^5 + w^3 - w\right)' $$

$$ h'(w) = \frac{1}{w^7 - w^5 + w^3 - w}\left(7w^6 - 5w^4 + 3w^2 - 1\right) $$

$$ \boxed{h'(w) = \frac{7w^6 - 5w^4 + 3w^2 - 1}{w^7 - w^5 + w^3 - w}} $$

**19.** $g(t) = \ln\left(1 - \csc(t)\right)$

**Solution**

$$ g'(t) = \frac{1}{1 - \csc(t)}\left(1 - \csc(t)\right)' $$

$$ g'(t) = \frac{1}{1 - \csc(t)}\left(0 - (-\csc(t)\cot(t))\right) $$

$$ g'(t) = \frac{1}{1 - \csc(t)}\left(\csc(t)\cot(t)\right) $$

$$ \boxed{g'(t) = \frac{\csc(t)\cot(t)}{1 - \csc(t)}} $$

**20.** $f(v) = \tan^{-1}(3 - 2v)$

**Solution**

$$ f'(v) = \frac{1}{1 + (3 - 2v)^2}(3 - 2v)' $$

$$ f'(v) = \frac{1}{1 + (3 - 2v)^2}(0 - 2) $$

$$ \boxed{f'(v) = \frac{-2}{1 + (3 - 2v)^2}} $$

**21.** $h(t) = \sin^{-1}(9t)$

**Solution**

$$ h(t) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - (9t)^2}}(9t)' $$

$$ h(t) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - 81t^2}}(9) $$

$$ \boxed{h(t) = \frac{9}{\sqrt{1 - 81t^2}}} $$

**22.** $A(t) = \cos(t) - \sqrt[6]{1 - \sin(t)}$

**Solution**

$$ A(t) = \cos(t) - (1 - \sin(t))^{\frac{1}{6}} $$

$$ A'(t) = -\sin(t) - \frac{1}{6}(1 - \sin(t))^{-\frac{5}{6}}\left(1 - \sin(t)\right)' $$

$$ A'(t) = -\sin(t) - \frac{1}{6}(1 - \sin(t))^{-\frac{5}{6}}\left(0 - \cos(t)\right) $$

$$ \boxed{A'(t) = -\sin(t) + \frac{1}{6}\cos(t)(1 - \sin(t))^{-\frac{5}{6}}} $$

**23.** $H(z) = \ln(6z) - 4\sec(z)$

**Solution**

$$ H'(z) = \frac{1}{6z}(6z)' - \left[(4)'(\sec(z)) + (4)(\sec(z))'\right] $$

$$ H'(z) = \frac{1}{6z}(6) - \left[(0)(\sec(z)) + (4)(\sec(z)\tan(z))\right] $$

$$ H'(z) = \frac{6}{6z} - 4\sec(z)\tan(z) $$

$$ \boxed{H'(z) = \frac{1}{z} - 4\sec(z)\tan(z)} $$

**24.** $f(x) = \tan^4(x) + \tan\left(x^4\right)$

**Solution**

$$ f'(x) = 4\tan^3(x)\left(\tan(x)\right)' + \sec^2(x^4)(x^4)' $$

$$ f'(x) = 4\tan^3(x)\sec^2(x) + \sec^2(x^4)(4x^3) $$

$$ \boxed{f'(x) = 4\tan^3(x)\sec^2(x) + 4x^3\sec^2(x^4)} $$

**25.** $f(u) = \mathbf{e}^{4u} - 6\mathbf{e}^{-u} + 7\mathbf{e}^{u^2 - 8u}$

**Solution**

$$ f'(u) = \mathbf{e}^{4u}(4u)' - 6\mathbf{e}^{-u}(-u)' + 7\mathbf{e}^{u^2 - 8u}\left(u^2 - 8u\right)' $$

$$ f'(u) = \mathbf{e}^{4u}(4) - 6\mathbf{e}^{-u}(-1) + 7\mathbf{e}^{u^2 - 8u}\left(2u - 8\right) $$

$$ \boxed{f'(u) = 4\mathbf{e}^{4u} + 6\mathbf{e}^{-u} + 7\left(2u - 8\right)\mathbf{e}^{u^2 - 8u}} $$

**26.** $g(z) = \sec^8(z) + \sec\left(z^8\right)$

**Solution**

$$ g'(z) = 8\sec^7(z)(\sec(z))' + \sec\left(z^8\right)\tan\left(z^8\right)\left(z^8\right)' $$

$$ g'(z) = 8\sec^7(z)\sec(z)\tan(z) + \sec\left(z^8\right)\tan\left(z^8\right)\left(8z^7\right) $$

$$ \boxed{g'(z) = 8\sec^8(z)\tan(z) + 8z^7\sec\left(z^8\right)\tan\left(z^8\right)} $$

**27.** $k(w) = \left(w^4 - 1\right)^5 + \sqrt{2 + 9w}$

**Solution**

$$ k(w) = \left(w^4 - 1\right)^5 + (2 + 9w)^{\frac{1}{2}} $$

$$ k'(w) = 5\left(w^4 - 1\right)^4\left(w^4 - 1\right)' + \frac{1}{2}(2 + 9w)^{-\frac{1}{2}}(2 + 9w)' $$

$$ k'(w) = 5\left(w^4 - 1\right)^4\left(4w^3 - 0\right) + \frac{1}{2}(2 + 9w)^{-\frac{1}{2}}(0 + 9) $$

$$ \boxed{k'(w) = 20w^3\left(w^4 - 1\right)^4 + \frac{9}{2}(2 + 9w)^{-\frac{1}{2}}} $$

**28.** $h(x) = \sqrt[3]{x^2 - 5x + 1} + (9x + 4)^{-7}$

**Solution**

$$ h(x) = (x^2 - 5x + 1)^{\frac{1}{3}} + (9x + 4)^{-7} $$

$$ h'(x) = \frac{1}{3}\left(x^2 - 5x + 1\right)^{-\frac{2}{3}}\left(x^2 - 5x + 1\right)' + (-7)(9x + 4)^{-8}(9x + 4)' $$

$$ h'(x) = \frac{1}{3}\left(x^2 - 5x + 1\right)^{-\frac{2}{3}}\left(2x - 5 + 0\right) + (-7)(9x + 4)^{-8}(9 + 0) $$

$$ \boxed{h'(x) = \frac{2x - 5}{3}\left(x^2 - 5x + 1\right)^{-\frac{2}{3}} - 63(9x + 4)^{-8}} $$

**29.** $T(x) = \left(2x^3 - 1\right)^5(5 - 3x)^4$

**Solution**

$$ T'(x) = 5\left(2x^3 - 1\right)^4\left(2x^3 - 1\right)'4\left(5 - 3x\right)^3\left(5 - 3x\right)' $$

$$ T'(x) = 5\left(2x^3 - 1\right)^4\left(6x^2 - 0\right)4\left(5 - 3x\right)^3\left(0 - 3\right) $$

$$ T'(x) = 30x^2\left(2x^3 - 1\right)^4(-12)\left(5 - 3x\right)^3 $$

$$ \boxed{T'(x) = -360x^2\left(2x^3 - 1\right)^4\left(5 - 3x\right)^3} $$

**30.** $w = \left(z^2 + 4z\right)\sin(1 - 2z)$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{dw}{dz} = \left[\left(z^2 + 4z\right)'\left(\sin(1 - 2z)\right) + \left(z^2 + 4z\right)\left(\sin(1 - 2z)\right)'\right] $$

$$ \frac{dw}{dz} = (2z + 4)\left(\sin(1 - 2z)\right) + \left(z^2 + 4z\right)\left(\cos(1 - 2z)(1 - 2z)'\right) $$

$$ \frac{dw}{dz} = (2z + 4)\left(\sin(1 - 2z)\right) + \left(z^2 + 4z\right)\left(\cos(1 - 2z)(0 - 2)\right) $$

$$ \boxed{\frac{dw}{dz} = (2z + 4)\sin(1 - 2z) - 2\left(z^2 + 4z\right)\cos(1 - 2z)} $$

**31.** $Y(t) = t^8\cos^4(t)$

**Solution**

$$ Y'(t) = \left[(t^8)'(\cos^4(t)) + (t^8)(\cos^4(t))'\right] $$

$$ Y'(t) = \left[8t^7\cos^4(t) + t^8(4\cos^3(t)(\cos(t))')\right] $$

$$ Y'(t) = \left[8t^7\cos^4(t) + t^8(4\cos^3(t)(-\sin(t)))\right] $$

$$ \boxed{Y'(t) = 8t^7\cos^4(t) - 4t^8\cos^3(t)\sin(t)} $$

**32.** $f(x) = \sqrt{6 - x^4}\ln(10x + 3)$

**Solution**

$$ f(x) = (6 - x^4)^{\frac{1}{2}}\ln(10x + 3) $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{1}{2}(6 - x^4)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(6 - x^4\right)'\frac{1}{10x + 3}(10x + 3)' $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{1}{2}(6 - x^4)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(0 - 4x^3\right)\frac{1}{10x + 3}(10 + 0) $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{-4x^3}{2}(6 - x^4)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\frac{10}{10x + 3} $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{-40x^3}{2(10x + 3)}(6 - x^4)^{-\frac{1}{2}} $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{-40x^3}{20x + 6}(6 - x^4)^{-\frac{1}{2}} $$

$$ \boxed{f'(x) = \frac{-40x^3}{(20x + 6)\sqrt{6 - x^4}}} $$

**33.** $A(z) = \sec(4z)\tan\left(z^2\right)$

**Solution**

$$ A'(z) = (\sec(4z))'\left(\tan\left(z^2\right)\right) + (\sec(4z))\left(\tan\left(z^2\right)\right)' $$

$$ A'(z) = (\sec(4z)\tan(4z)(4z)')\left(\tan\left(z^2\right)\right) + (\sec(4z))\left(\sec^2\left(z^2\right)\left(z^2\right)'\right) $$

$$ A'(z) = (\sec(4z)\tan(4z)(4))\left(\tan\left(z^2\right)\right) + (\sec(4z))\left(\sec^2\left(z^2\right)\left(2z\right)\right) $$

$$ \boxed{A'(z) = 4\sec(4z)\tan(4z)\tan\left(z^2\right) + 2z\sec(4z)\sec^2\left(z^2\right)} $$

**34.** $h(v) = \sqrt{5v} + \ln\left(v^4\right)\mathbf{e}^{6 + 9v}$

**Solution**

$$ h(v) = (5v)^{\frac{1}{2}} + \ln\left(v^4\right)\mathbf{e}^{6 + 9v} $$

$$ h'(v) = \frac{1}{2}(5v)^{-\frac{1}{2}}(5v)' + \frac{1}{v^4}\left(v^4\right)'\mathbf{e}^{6 + 9v}(6 + 9v)' $$

$$ h'(v) = \frac{1}{2}(5v)^{-\frac{1}{2}}(5) + \frac{1}{v^4}\left(4v^3\right)\mathbf{e}^{6 + 9v}(0 + 9) $$

$$ h'(v) = \frac{5}{2}(5v)^{-\frac{1}{2}} + \frac{4v^3}{v^4}\mathbf{e}^{6 + 9v}(9) $$

$$ h'(v) = \frac{5}{2}(5v)^{-\frac{1}{2}} + \frac{36v^3}{v^4}\mathbf{e}^{6 + 9v} $$

$$ \boxed{h'(v) = \frac{5}{2\sqrt{5v}} + \frac{36\mathbf{e}^{6 + 9v}}{v}} $$

**35.** $f(x) = \dfrac{\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}}{\sqrt{x^4 + 7}}$

**Solution**

$$ f(x) = \frac{\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}}{\left(x^4 + 7\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}} $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{\left(\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\right)'\left(\left(x^4 + 7\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right) - \left(\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\right)\left(\left(x^4 + 7\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right)'}{\left(\left(x^4 + 7\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right)^2}$$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{\left(\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\left(x^2 + 8x\right)'\right)\left(\left(x^4 + 7\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right) - \left(\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\right)\left(\dfrac{1}{2}\left(x^4 + 7\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(x^4 + 7\right)'\right)}{\left(\left(x^4 + 7\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right)^2}$$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{\left(\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\left(2x + 8\right)\right)\left(\left(x^4 + 7\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right) - \left(\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\right)\left(\dfrac{1}{2}\left(x^4 + 7\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(4x^3 + 0\right)\right)}{\left(\left(x^4 + 7\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right)^2}$$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{\left(2x + 8\right)\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\left(x^4 + 7\right)^{\frac{1}{2}} - \left(\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\right)\left(\dfrac{4x^3}{2\sqrt{x^4 + 7}}\right)}{x^4 + 7}$$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{\left(2x + 8\right)\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\left(\sqrt{x^4 + 7}\right) - \left(\dfrac{4x^3\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}}{2\sqrt{x^4 + 7}}\right)}{x^4 + 7}$$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{\dfrac{\left(2x + 8\right)\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\left(\sqrt{x^4 + 7}\right)\left(2\sqrt{x^4 + 7}\right)}{2\sqrt{x^4 + 7}} - \dfrac{4x^3\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}}{2\sqrt{x^4 + 7}}}{x^4 + 7}$$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{\dfrac{2\left(x^4 + 7\right)\left(2x + 8\right)\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x} - 4x^3\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}}{2\sqrt{x^4 + 7}}}{x^4 + 7}$$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{2\left(x^4 + 7\right)\left(2x + 8\right)\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x} - 4x^3\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}}{(x^4 + 7)(2\sqrt{x^4 + 7})}$$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\left[2\left(x^4 + 7\right)\left(2x + 8\right) - 4x^3\right]}{(2)(x^4 + 7)^{\frac{1}{2}}(x^4 + 7)^1}$$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\left[2\left(x^4 + 7\right)\left(2x + 8\right) - 4x^3\right]}{(2)(x^4 + 7)^{\frac{3}{2}}}$$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\left[2\left(x^4 + 7\right)\left(2x + 8\right) - 4x^3\right]}{2\sqrt{(x^4 + 7)^3}} $$

$$ \boxed{f'(x) = \frac{\mathbf{e}^{x^2 + 8x}\left[\left(x^4 + 7\right)\left(2x + 8\right) - 2x^3\right]}{\sqrt{(x^4 + 7)^3}}} $$

**36.** $g(x) = \dfrac{(4x + 1)^3}{\left(x^2 - x\right)^6}$

**Solution**

$$ g'(x) = \frac{\left(\left(4x + 1\right)^3\right)'\left(\left(x^2 - x\right)^6\right) - \left(\left(4x + 1\right)^3\right)\left(\left(x^2 - x\right)^6\right)'}{\left(\left(x^2 - x\right)^6\right)^2} $$

$$ g'(x) = \frac{\left(3\left(4x + 1\right)^2\left(4x + 1\right)'\right)\left(\left(x^2 - x\right)^6\right) - \left(\left(4x + 1\right)^3\right)\left(6\left(x^2 - x\right)^5\left(x^2 - x\right)'\right)}{\left(x^2 - x\right)^{12}} $$

$$ g'(x) = \frac{\left(3\left(4x + 1\right)^2\left(4 + 0\right)\right)\left(\left(x^2 - x\right)^6\right) - \left(\left(4x + 1\right)^3\right)\left(6\left(x^2 - x\right)^5\left(2x - 1\right)\right)}{\left(x^2 - x\right)^{12}} $$

$$ g'(x) = \frac{12\left(4x + 1\right)^2\left(x^2 - x\right)^6 - \left(4x + 1\right)^3(6)(2x - 1)\left(x^2 - x\right)^5}{\left(x^2 - x\right)^{12}} $$

$$ g'(x) = \frac{\left(x^2 - x\right)^5\left[12\left(4x + 1\right)^2\left(x^2 - x\right) - \left(4x + 1\right)^3(6)(2x - 1)\right]}{\left(x^2 - x\right)^{12}} $$

$$ g'(x) = \frac{12(4x + 1)^2\left(x^2 - x\right) - (4x + 1)^3(6)(2x - 1)}{\left(x^2 - x\right)^7} $$

$$ g'(x) = \frac{(4x + 1)^2\left[12\left(x^2 - x\right) - 6(4x + 1)(2x - 1)\right]}{\left(x^2 - x\right)^7} $$

$$ g'(x) = \frac{(4x + 1)^2\left[\left(12x^2 - 12x\right) - 6\left(8x^2 - 2x - 1\right)\right]}{\left(x^2 - x\right)^7} $$

$$ g'(x) = \frac{(4x + 1)^2\left[12x^2 - 12x - 48x^2 + 12x + 6\right]}{\left(x^2 - x\right)^7} $$

$$ \boxed{g'(x) = \frac{(4x + 1)^2\left[-36x^2 + 6\right]}{\left(x^2 - x\right)^7}} $$

**37.** $g(t) = \dfrac{\csc(1 - t)}{1 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}}$

**Solution**

$$ g'(t) = \frac{(\csc(1 - t))'\left(1 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right) - (\csc(1 - t))\left(1 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right)'}{\left(1 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right)^2} $$

$$ g'(t) = \frac{(-\csc(1 - t)\cot(1 - t)(1 - t)')\left(1 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right) - (\csc(1 - t))\left(0 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right)(-t)'}{\left(1 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right)^2} $$

$$ g'(t) = \frac{(-\csc(1 - t)\cot(1 - t)(0 - 1))\left(1 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right) - (\csc(1 - t))\left(0 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right)(-1)}{\left(1 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right)^2} $$

$$ g'(t) = \frac{\csc(1 - t)\cot(1 - t)\left(1 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right) + \csc(1 - t)\mathbf{e}^{-t}}{\left(1 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right)^2} $$

$$ \boxed{g'(t) = \frac{\csc(1 - t)\left[\cot(1 - t)\left(1 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right) + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right]}{\left(1 + \mathbf{e}^{-t}\right)^2}} $$

**38.** $V(z) = \dfrac{\sin^2(z)}{1 + \cos\left(z^2\right)}$

**Solution**

$$ V'(z) = \frac{\left(\sin^2(z)\right)'\left(1 + \cos\left(z^2\right)\right) - \left(\sin^2(z)\right)\left(1 + \cos\left(z^2\right)\right)'}{\left(1 + \cos\left(z^2\right)\right)^2} $$

$$ V'(z) = \frac{\left(2\sin(z)\left(\sin(z)\right)'\right)\left(1 + \cos\left(z^2\right)\right) - \left(\sin^2(z)\right)\left(0 + \left(-\sin\left(z^2\right)\right)\left(z^2\right)'\right)}{\left(1 + \cos\left(z^2\right)\right)^2} $$

$$ V'(z) = \frac{2\sin(z)\cos(z)\left(1 + \cos\left(z^2\right)\right) + \sin^2(z)\sin\left(z^2\right)(2z)}{\left(1 + \cos\left(z^2\right)\right)^2} $$

$$ \boxed{V'(z) = \frac{2\sin(z)\left[\cos(z)\left(1 + \cos\left(z^2\right)\right) + z\sin(z)\sin\left(z^2\right)\right]}{\left(1 + \cos\left(z^2\right)\right)^2}} $$

**39.** $U(w) = \ln\left(\mathbf{e}^w\cos(w)\right)$

**Solution**

$$ U'(w) = \frac{1}{\mathbf{e}^w\cos(w)}(\mathbf{e}^w\cos(w))' $$

$$ U'(w) = \frac{1}{\mathbf{e}^w\cos(w)}\left[(\mathbf{e}^w)'(\cos(w)) + (\mathbf{e}^w)(\cos(w))'\right] $$

$$ U'(w) = \frac{1}{\mathbf{e}^w\cos(w)}\left[(\mathbf{e}^w)(\cos(w)) + (\mathbf{e}^w)(-\sin(w))\right] $$

$$ U'(w) = \frac{1}{\mathbf{e}^w\cos(w)}\left[\mathbf{e}^w(\cos(w) - \sin(w))\right] $$

$$ U'(w) = \frac{\mathbf{e}^w(\cos(w) - \sin(w))}{\mathbf{e}^w\cos(w)} $$

$$ U'(w) = \frac{\cos(w) - \sin(w)}{\cos(w)} $$

$$ U'(w) = \frac{\cos(w)}{\cos(w)} - \frac{\sin(w)}{\cos(w)} $$

$$ \boxed{U'(w) = 1 - \tan(w)} $$

**40.** $h(t) = \tan\left(\left(5 - t^2\right)\ln(t)\right)$

**Solution**

$$ h'(t) = \sec^2\left(\left(5 - t^2\right)\ln(t)\right)\left[\left(5 - t^2\right)\ln(t)\right]' $$

$$ h'(t) = \sec^2\left(\left(5 - t^2\right)\ln(t)\right)\left[(5 - t^2)'(\ln(t)) + (5 - t^2)(\ln(t))'\right] $$

$$ h'(t) = \sec^2\left(\left(5 - t^2\right)\ln(t)\right)\left[(0 - 2t)(\ln(t)) + (5 - t^2)\left(\frac{1}{t}\right)\right] $$

$$ \boxed{h'(t) = \sec^2\left(\left(5 - t^2\right)\ln(t)\right)\left[-2t\ln(t) + \frac{5 - t^2}{t}\right]} $$

**41.** $z = \ln\left(\dfrac{3 + x}{2 - x^2}\right)$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{dz}{dx} = \frac{1}{\left(\dfrac{3 + x}{2 - x^2}\right)}\left(\frac{3 + x}{2 - x^2}\right)' $$

$$ \frac{dz}{dx} = \frac{2 - x^2}{3 + x}\left(\frac{(3 + x)'(2 - x^2) - (3 + x)(2 - x^2)'}{(2 - x^2)^2}\right) $$

$$ \frac{dz}{dx} = \frac{2 - x^2}{3 + x}\left(\frac{(0 + 1)(2 - x^2) - (3 + x)(0 - 2x)}{(2 - x^2)^2}\right) $$

$$ \frac{dz}{dx} = \frac{2 - x^2}{3 + x}\left(\frac{2 - x^2 - (-6x - 2x^2)}{(2 - x^2)^2}\right) $$

$$ \frac{dz}{dx} = \frac{2 - x^2}{3 + x}\left(\frac{2 - x^2 + 6x + 2x^2}{(2 - x^2)^2}\right) $$

$$ \frac{dz}{dx} = \frac{2 - x^2}{3 + x}\left(\frac{x^2 + 6x + 2}{(2 - x^2)^2}\right) $$

$$ \boxed{\frac{dz}{dx} = \frac{(2 - x^2)(x^2 + 6x + 2)}{(3 + x)(2 - x^2)^2}} $$

**42.** $g(v) = \sqrt{\dfrac{\mathbf{e}^v}{7 + 2v}}$

**Solution**

$$ g(v) = \left(\frac{\mathbf{e}^v}{7 + 2v}\right)^{\frac{1}{2}} $$

$$ g'(v) = \frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}^v}{7 + 2v}\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}^v}{7 + 2v}\right)' $$

$$ g'(v) = \frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}^v}{7 + 2v}\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(\frac{\left(\mathbf{e}^v\right)'(7 + 2v) - \left(\mathbf{e}^v\right)(7 + 2v)'}{(7 + 2v)^2}\right) $$

$$ g'(v) = \frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}^v}{7 + 2v}\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(\frac{\left(\mathbf{e}^v\right)(7 + 2v) - \left(\mathbf{e}^v\right)(0 + 2)}{(7 + 2v)^2}\right) $$

$$ g'(v) = \frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}^v}{7 + 2v}\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}^v(7 + 2v)}{(7 + 2v)^2} - \frac{2\mathbf{e}^v}{(7 + 2v)^2}\right) $$

$$ g'(v) = \frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}^v}{7 + 2v}\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}^v}{7 + 2v} - \frac{2\mathbf{e}^v}{(7 + 2v)^2}\right) $$

$$ g'(v) = \frac{1}{2}\sqrt{\frac{7 + 2v}{\mathbf{e}^v}}\left[\mathbf{e}^v\left(\frac{1}{7 + 2v} - \frac{2}{(7 + 2v)^2}\right)\right] $$

$$ g'(v) = \frac{1}{2}\sqrt{\frac{7 + 2v}{\mathbf{e}^v}}\left[\mathbf{e}^v\left(\frac{7 + 2v - 2}{(7 + 2v)^2}\right)\right] $$

$$ g'(v) = \frac{1}{2}\sqrt{\frac{7 + 2v}{\mathbf{e}^v}}\left[\mathbf{e}^v\left(\frac{5 + 2v}{(7 + 2v)^2}\right)\right] $$

$$ g'(v) = \frac{1}{2}\sqrt{7 + 2v}\left(\mathbf{e}^{\frac{v}{2}}\right)\left(\frac{5 + 2v}{(7 + 2v)^2}\right) $$

$$ \boxed{g'(v) = \frac{\mathbf{e}^{\frac{v}{2}}(5 + 2v)}{2\sqrt{(7 + 2v)^3}}} $$

**43.** $f(x) = \sqrt{x^2 + \sqrt{1 + 4x}}$

**Solution**

$$ f(x) = \left(x^2 + \left(1 + 4x\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right)^{\frac{1}{2}} $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{1}{2}\left(x^2 + \left(1 + 4x\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(x^2 + \left(1 + 4x\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right)' $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{1}{2}\left(x^2 + \left(1 + 4x\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(2x + \frac{1}{2}\left(1 + 4x\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(1 + 4x\right)'\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{1}{2}\left(x^2 + \left(1 + 4x\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(2x + \frac{1}{2}\left(1 + 4x\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(0 + 4\right)\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = \left(\frac{1}{2\sqrt{x^2 + \sqrt{1 + 4x}}}\right)\left(2x + \frac{4}{2\sqrt{1 + 4x}}\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = \left(\frac{1}{2\sqrt{x^2 + \sqrt{1 + 4x}}}\right)\left(\frac{2x(2\sqrt{1 + 4x}) + 4}{2\sqrt{1 + 4x}}\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = \left(\frac{1}{2\sqrt{x^2 + \sqrt{1 + 4x}}}\right)\left(\frac{4x\sqrt{1 + 4x} + 4}{2\sqrt{1 + 4x}}\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = \left(\frac{1}{2\sqrt{x^2 + \sqrt{1 + 4x}}}\right)\left(\frac{4(x\sqrt{1 + 4x} + 1)}{2\sqrt{1 + 4x}}\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = \left(\frac{1}{2\sqrt{x^2 + \sqrt{1 + 4x}}}\right)\left(\frac{2(x\sqrt{1 + 4x} + 1)}{\sqrt{1 + 4x}}\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{2(x\sqrt{1 + 4x} + 1)}{(2\sqrt{x^2 + \sqrt{1 + 4x}})(\sqrt{1 + 4x})} $$

$$ \boxed{f'(x) = \frac{x\sqrt{1 + 4x} + 1}{\sqrt{1 + 4x}\sqrt{x^2 + \sqrt{1 + 4x}}}} $$

**44.** $u = \left(6 + \cos(8w)\right)^5$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{du}{dw} = 5\left(6 + \cos(8w)\right)^4(6 + \cos(8w))' $$

$$ \frac{du}{dw} = 5\left(6 + \cos(8w)\right)^4(0 + (-\sin(8w))(8w)') $$

$$ \frac{du}{dw} = 5\left(6 + \cos(8w)\right)^4(0 + (-\sin(8w))(8)) $$

$$ \frac{du}{dw} = 5\left(6 + \cos(8w)\right)^4(-8\sin(8w)) $$

$$ \boxed{\frac{du}{dw} = -40\sin(8w)\left(6 + \cos(8w)\right)^4} $$

**45.** $h(z) = \left(7z - z^2 + \mathbf{e}^{5z^2 + z}\right)^{-4}$

**Solution**

$$ h'(z) = -4\left(7z - z^2 + \mathbf{e}^{5z^2 + z}\right)^{-5}\left(7z - z^2 + \mathbf{e}^{5z^2 + z}\right)' $$

$$ h'(z) = -4\left(7z - z^2 + \mathbf{e}^{5z^2 + z}\right)^{-5}\left(7 - 2z + \mathbf{e}^{5z^2 + z}\left(5z^2 + z\right)'\right) $$

$$ \boxed{h'(z) = -4\left(7z - z^2 + \mathbf{e}^{5z^2 + z}\right)^{-5}\left(7 - 2z + \mathbf{e}^{5z^2 + z}(10z + 1)\right)} $$

**46.** $A(y) = \ln\left(7y^3 + \sin^2(y)\right)$

**Solution**

$$ A'(y) = \frac{1}{7y^3 + \sin^2(y)}\left(7y^3 + \sin^2(y)\right)' $$

$$ A'(y) = \frac{1}{7y^3 + \sin^2(y)}\left(21y^2 + 2\sin(y)(\sin(y))'\right) $$

$$ A'(y) = \frac{1}{7y^3 + \sin^2(y)}\left(21y^2 + 2\sin(y)\cos(y)\right) $$

$$ \boxed{A'(y) = \frac{21y^2 + 2\sin(y)\cos(y)}{7y^3 + \sin^2(y)}} $$

**47.** $g(x) = \csc^6(8x)$

**Solution**

$$ g'(x) = 6\csc^5(8x)(\csc(8x))' $$

$$ g'(x) = 6\csc^5(8x)(-\csc(8x)\cot(8x)(8x)') $$

$$ g'(x) = 6\csc^5(8x)(-\csc(8x)\cot(8x)(8)) $$

$$ g'(x) = -48\csc^5(8x)\csc(8x)\cot(8x) $$

$$ \boxed{g'(x) = -48\csc^6(8x)\cot(8x)} $$

**48.** $V(w) = \sqrt[4]{\cos\left(9 - w^2\right) + \ln(6w + 5)}$

**Solution**

$$ V(w)= \left(\cos\left(9 - w^2\right) + \ln(6w + 5)\right)^{\frac{1}{4}} $$

$$ V'(w) = \frac{1}{4}\left(\cos\left(9 - w^2\right) + \ln(6w + 5)\right)^{-\frac{3}{4}}\left(\cos\left(9 - w^2\right) + \ln(6w + 5)\right)' $$

$$ V'(w) = \frac{1}{4}\left(\cos\left(9 - w^2\right) + \ln(6w + 5)\right)^{-\frac{3}{4}}\left(-\sin\left(9 - w^2\right)\left(9 - w^2\right)' + \frac{1}{6w + 5}(6w + 5)'\right) $$

$$ V'(w) = \frac{1}{4}\left(\cos\left(9 - w^2\right) + \ln(6w + 5)\right)^{-\frac{3}{4}}\left(-\sin\left(9 - w^2\right)\left(0 - 2w\right) + \frac{1}{6w + 5}(6 + 0)\right) $$

$$ V'(w) = \frac{1}{4}\left(\cos\left(9 - w^2\right) + \ln(6w + 5)\right)^{-\frac{3}{4}}\left(2w\sin\left(9 - w^2\right) + \frac{6}{6w + 5}\right) $$

$$ V'(w) = \frac{1}{4\sqrt[4]{\left[\cos\left(9 - w^2\right) + \ln(6w + 5)\right]^3}}\left(2w\sin\left(9 - w^2\right) + \frac{6}{6w + 5}\right) $$

$$ V'(w) = \frac{1}{4\sqrt[4]{\left[\cos\left(9 - w^2\right) + \ln(6w + 5)\right]^3}}\left(\frac{\left[2w\sin\left(9 - w^2\right)\right](6w + 5) + 6}{6w + 5}\right) $$

$$ V'(w) = \frac{\left[2w\sin\left(9 - w^2\right)\right](6w + 5) + 6}{4\sqrt[4]{\left[\cos\left(9 - w^2\right) + \ln(6w + 5)\right]^3}(6w + 5)} $$

$$ V'(w) = \frac{(2w)(6w + 5)\sin\left(9 - w^2\right) + 6}{4\sqrt[4]{\left[\cos\left(9 - w^2\right) + \ln(6w + 5)\right]^3}(6w + 5)} $$

$$ \boxed{V'(w) = \frac{w(6w + 5)\sin\left(9 - w^2\right) + 3}{2\sqrt[4]{\left[\cos\left(9 - w^2\right) + \ln(6w + 5)\right]^3}(6w + 5)}} $$

**49.** $h(t) = \sin\left(t^3\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right)$

**Solution**

$$ h'(t) = \cos\left(t^3\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right)\left(t^3\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right)' $$

$$ h'(t) = \cos\left(t^3\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right)\left(\left(t^3\right)'\left(\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right) + \left(t^3\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right)'\right) $$

$$ h'(t) = \cos\left(t^3\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right)\left(\left(3t^2\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right) + \left(t^3\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^{-6t}(-6t)'\right)\right) $$

$$ h'(t) = \cos\left(t^3\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right)\left(\left(3t^2\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right) + \left(t^3\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^{-6t}(-6)\right)\right) $$

$$ h'(t) = \cos\left(t^3\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right)\left(3t^2\mathbf{e}^{-6t} - 6t^3\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right) $$

$$ h'(t) = \cos\left(t^3\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right)\left(3t^2\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\left(1 - 2t\right)\right) $$

$$ \boxed{h'(t) = 3t^2\mathbf{e}^{-6t}(1 - 2t)\cos\left(t^3\mathbf{e}^{-6t}\right)} $$

**50.**
$B(r) = \left(\mathbf{e}^{\sin(r)} - \sin\left(\mathbf{e}^r\right)\right)^8$

**Solution**

$$ B'(r) = 8\left(\mathbf{e}^{\sin(r)} - \sin\left(\mathbf{e}^r\right)\right)^7\left(\mathbf{e}^{\sin(r)} - \sin\left(\mathbf{e}^r\right)\right)' $$

$$ B'(r) = 8\left(\mathbf{e}^{\sin(r)} - \sin\left(\mathbf{e}^r\right)\right)^7\left(\mathbf{e}^{\sin(r)}(\sin(r))' - \cos\left(\mathbf{e}^r\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^r\right)'\right) $$

$$ B'(r) = 8\left(\mathbf{e}^{\sin(r)} - \sin\left(\mathbf{e}^r\right)\right)^7\left(\mathbf{e}^{\sin(r)}\cos(r) - \cos\left(\mathbf{e}^r\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^r\right)\right) $$

$$ \boxed{B'(r) = 8\left(\mathbf{e}^{\sin(r)} - \sin\left(\mathbf{e}^r\right)\right)^7\left(\mathbf{e}^{\sin(r)}\cos(r) - \mathbf{e}^r\cos\left(\mathbf{e}^r\right)\right)} $$

**51.** $f(z) = \cos^2\left(1 + \cos^2(z)\right)$

**Solution**

$$ f'(z) = 2\cos\left(1 + \cos^2(z)\right)\left(\cos\left(1 + \cos^2(z)\right)\right)' $$

$$ f'(z) = 2\cos\left(1 + \cos^2(z)\right)\left(-\sin\left(1 + \cos^2(z)\right)\left(1 + \cos^2(z)\right)'\right) $$

$$ f'(z) = 2\cos\left(1 + \cos^2(z)\right)\left(-\sin\left(1 + \cos^2(z)\right)\left(0 + 2\cos(z)(\cos(z))'\right)\right) $$

$$ f'(z) = 2\cos\left(1 + \cos^2(z)\right)\left(2\sin\left(1 + \cos^2(z)\right)\cos(z)\sin(z)\right) $$

$$ \boxed{f'(z) = 4\cos(z)\sin(z)\cos\left(1 + \cos^2(z)\right)\sin\left(1 + \cos^2(z)\right)} $$

**52.** Find the tangent line to $f(x) = \left(2 - 4x^2\right)^5$ at $x = 1$.

**Solution**

$$ f'(x) = 5\left(2 - 4x^2\right)^4\left(2 - 4x^2\right)' $$

$$ f'(x) = 5\left(2 - 4x^2\right)^4\left(0 - 8x\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = -40x\left(2 - 4x^2\right)^4 $$

$$ f(1) = \left(2 - 4(1)^2\right)^5 $$

$$ f(1) = \left(2 - 4(1)\right)^5 $$

$$ f(1) = (2 - 4)^5 $$

$$ f(1) = (-2)^5 $$

$$ f(1) = -32 $$

$$ f'(1) = -40(1)\left(2 - 4(1)^2\right)^4 $$

$$ f'(1) = -40(2 - 4)^4 $$

$$ f'(1) = -40(-2)^4 $$

$$ f'(1) = -40(16) $$

$$ f'(1) = -640 $$

$$ y = f(a) + f'(a)(x - a) $$

$$ y = (-32) + (-640)(x - 1) $$

$$ y = -32 - 640x + 640 $$

$$ \boxed{y = 608 - 640x} $$

**53.** Find the tangent line to
$f(x) = \mathbf{e}^{2x + 4} - 8\ln\left(x^2 - 3\right)$ at $x = -2$.

**Solution**

$$ f'(x) = \mathbf{e}^{2x + 4}(2x + 4)' - \frac{8}{x^2 - 3}(x^2 - 3)'  $$

$$ f'(x) = \mathbf{e}^{2x + 4}(2 + 0) - \frac{8}{x^2 - 3}(2x - 0)  $$

$$ f'(x) = 2\mathbf{e}^{2x + 4} - \frac{16x}{x^2 - 3}  $$

$$ f(-2) = \mathbf{e}^{2(-2) + 4} - 8\ln\left((-2)^2 - 3\right) $$

$$ f(-2) = \mathbf{e}^{0} - 8\ln\left(1\right) $$

$$ f(-2) = 1 - 8\ln\left(1\right) $$

$$ f(-2) = 1 - 8(0) $$

$$ f(-2) = 1 $$

$$ f'(-2) = 2\mathbf{e}^{2(-2) + 4} - \frac{16(-2)}{(-2)^2 - 3} $$

$$ f'(-2) = 2\mathbf{e}^{0} - \frac{-32}{1} $$

$$ f'(-2) = 2(1) + 32 $$

$$ f'(-2) = 34 $$

$$ y = f(a) + f'(a)(x - a) $$

$$ y = 1 + 34(x - (-2)) $$

$$ y = 1 + 34(x + 2) $$

$$ y = 1 + 34x + 68 $$

$$ \boxed{y = 34x + 69} $$

**54.** Determine where $A(t) = t^3(9 - t)^4$ is increasing and decreasing.

**Solution**

$$ A'(t) = \left(t^3\right)'\left[(9 - t)^4\right] + \left(t^3\right)\left[(9 - t)^4\right]' $$

$$ A'(t) = \left(3t^2\right)\left[(9 - t)^4\right] + \left(t^3\right)\left[4(9 - t)^3(9 - t)'\right] $$

$$ A'(t) = \left(3t^2\right)\left[(9 - t)^4\right] + \left(t^3\right)\left[4(9 - t)^3(0 - 1)\right] $$

$$ A'(t) = 3t^2\left(9 - t\right)^4 + t^3\left(-4(9 - t)^3\right) $$

$$ A'(t) = 3t^2\left(9 - t\right)^4 - 4t^3(9 - t)^3 $$

$$ A'(t) = t^2(9 - t)^3[3(9 - t) - 4t] $$

$$ A'(t) = t^2(9 - t)^3[3(9 - t) - 4t] $$

$$ A'(t) = t^2(9 - t)^3[27 - 3t - 4t] $$

$$ A'(t) = t^2(9 - t)^3(27 - 7t) $$

$$ t^2(9 - t)^3(27 - 7t) = 0 $$

$$ t = 0, t = 9, t = \frac{27}{7} $$

$$ -\infty < t < 0 \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ 0 < t < \frac{27}{7} \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ \frac{27}{7} < t < 9 \quad \text{ negative} $$

$$ 9 < t < \infty \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ \text{increasing : } -\infty < t < 0 \quad \& \quad 0 < t < \frac{27}{7} \quad \& \quad 9 < t< \infty $$

$$ \text{decreasing: } \frac{27}{7} < t < 9 $$

**55.** Is $h(x) = (2x + 1)^4(2 - x)^5$ increasing or decreasing more in the
interval $[-2, 3]$?

**Solution**

$$ h'(x) = ((2x + 1)^4)'((2 - x)^5) + ((2x + 1)^4)((2 - x)^5)' $$

$$ h'(x) = (4(2x + 1)^3(2x + 1)')((2 - x)^5) + ((2x + 1)^4)(5(2 - x)^4(2 - x)') $$

$$ h'(x) = (4(2x + 1)^3(2 + 0))((2 - x)^5) + ((2x + 1)^4)(5(2 - x)^4(0 - 1)) $$

$$ h'(x) = 8(2x + 1)^3(2 - x)^5 + (2x + 1)^4(-5(2 - x)^4) $$

$$ h'(x) = 8(2x + 1)^3(2 - x)^5 - 5(2x + 1)^4(2 - x)^4 $$

$$ h'(x) = (2x + 1)^3(2 - x)^4\left[8(2 - x) + 5(2x + 1)\right] $$

$$ h'(x) = (2x + 1)^3(2 - x)^4\left[8(2 - x) + 5(2x + 1)\right] = 0 $$

$$ (2x + 1)^3(2 - x)^4\left[8(2 - x) + 5(2x + 1)\right] = 0 $$

$$ (2x + 1)^3(2 - x)^4(2x + 21) = 0 $$

$$ (2x + 1)^3 = 0 $$

$$ 2x + 1 = 0 $$

$$ 2x = -1 $$

$$ x = -\frac{1}{2} $$

$$ (2 - x)^4 = 0 $$

$$ 2 - x = 0 $$

$$ x = 2 $$

$$ 2x + 21 = 0 $$

$$ 2x = -21 $$

$$ x = -\frac{21}{2} $$

$$ x = -\frac{1}{2}, x = 2, x = -\frac{21}{2} = -10.5 \text{ outside of given interval : } [-2, 3] $$

$$ -2 \leq x < -\frac{1}{2} \quad \text{ negative} $$

$$ -\frac{1}{2} < x < 2 \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ 2 < x \leq 3 \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ \text{increasing : } -\frac{1}{2} < x < 2 \quad \& \quad 2 < x \leq 3 $$

$$ \text{decreasing : } -2 \leq x < -\frac{1}{2} $$

$$ \text{The function } h(x) \text{ is increasing more on the interval of } [-2, 3] $$

**56.** Determine where $U(w) = 3\cos\left(\dfrac{w}{2}\right) + w - 3$ is
increasing and decreasing in the interval $[-10, 10]$.

**Solution**

$$ U'(w) = \left[(3)'\left(\cos\left(\frac{w}{2}\right)\right) + (3)\left(\cos\left(\frac{w}{2}\right)\right)'\right] + 1 - 0 $$

$$ U'(w) = \left[(0)\left(\cos\left(\frac{w}{2}\right)\right) + (3)\left(-\sin\left(\frac{w}{2}\right)\left(\frac{w}{2}\right)'\right)\right] + 1 $$

$$ U'(w) = \left[3\left(-\sin\left(\frac{w}{2}\right)\left(\frac{(w)'(2) - (w)(2)'}{(2)^2}\right)\right)\right] + 1 $$

$$ U'(w) = \left[3\left(-\sin\left(\frac{w}{2}\right)\left(\frac{(1)(2) - (w)(0)}{4}\right)\right)\right] + 1 $$

$$ U'(w) = \left[3\left(-\sin\left(\frac{w}{2}\right)\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)\right)\right] + 1 $$

$$ U'(w) = -\frac{3}{2}\sin\left(\frac{w}{2}\right) + 1 $$

$$ -\frac{3}{2}\sin\left(\frac{w}{2}\right) + 1 = 0 $$

$$ -\frac{3}{2}\sin\left(\frac{w}{2}\right) = -1 $$

$$ \sin\left(\frac{w}{2}\right) = \frac{2}{3} $$

$$ \sin^{-1}\left(\frac{2}{3}\right) = \frac{w}{2} \approx 0.7297 $$

Sine is positive in Quadrants I and II, therefore our two angles in the first
rotation of the Unit Circle are:

$$ \frac{w}{2} \approx 0 + 0.7297 $$

$$ \frac{w}{2} \approx \pi - 0.7297 \approx 2.4119 $$

This occurs every $2\pi$ interval, so if we say every interval is represented by
$n$, then:

$$ \frac{w}{2} = 0.7297 + 2\pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

And:

$$ \frac{w}{2} = 2.4119 + 2\pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

Evaluating for $w$ we get:

$$ w = 1.4594 + 4\pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

$$ w = 4.8238 + 4\pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

Now we just have to find all occurrences of $w$ within the interval of
$[-10, 10]$, of which we already have the two above. If we evalute for:

$$ w = 4.8238 + 4\pi(-1) \approx -7.7426 $$

This falls within our interval. This is the only other one in addition to our
two original angles.

Thusly we need to evaluate within the following ranges:

$$ w = -7.7426, w = 1.4594, w = 4.8238 $$

$$ -10 \leq w < -7.7426 \quad \text{ negative} $$

$$ -7.7426 < w < 1.4594 \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ 1.4594 < w < 4.8238  \quad \text{ negative} $$

$$ 4.8238 < w \leq 10  \quad \text{ positive} $$

Therefore we can say that $U(w)$ is:

$$ \text{increasing : } -7.74226 < w < 1.4594 \quad \& \quad 4.8238 < w \leq 10 $$

$$ \text{decreasing : } -10 \leq w < -7.7426 \quad \& \quad 1.4594 < w < 4.8238 $$

**57.** If the position of an object is given by $s(t) = 4\sin(3t) - 10t + 7$.
Determine where, if anywhere, the object is not moving in the interval $[0, 4]$.

**Solution**

$$ s'(t) = \left[(4)'(\sin(3t)) + (4)(\sin(3t))'\right] - 10 + 0 $$

$$ s'(t) = \left[(0)(\sin(3t)) + (4)(\cos(3t)(3t)')\right] - 10 $$

$$ s'(t) = \left[4(\cos(3t)(3))\right] - 10 $$

$$ s'(t) = 12\cos(3t) - 10 $$

$$ 12\cos(3t) - 10 = 0 $$

$$ 12\cos(3t) = 10 $$

$$ \cos(3t) = \frac{10}{12} $$

$$ \cos(3t) = \frac{5}{6} $$

$$ \cos^{-1}\left(\frac{5}{6}\right) = 3t \approx 0.5857 $$

Cosine is positive in Quadrants I and IV. So we can say our two angles in the
first rotation of the Unit Circle are:

$$ 3t = 0 + 0.5857 $$

$$ 3t = 2\pi - 0.5857 \approx 5.6975  $$

We can say that this occurs every $2\pi$ intervals. So if we say that $n$
represents the intervals, we get the following formulas representing every angle
that $3t$ occurs:

$$ 3t = 0.5857 + 2\pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

$$ 3t = 5.6975 + 2\pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

Evaluating each of these for $t$, we get:

$$ t = 0.1952 + \frac{2\pi n}{3}  \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

$$ t = 1.8992 + \frac{2\pi n}{3} \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

Both of these fall within the given interval of $[0, 4]$, let's evaluate other
$n$ that might fall within this range:

$$ t = 0.1952 + \frac{2\pi(1)}{3} \approx 2.2896 $$

$$ t = 1.8992 + \frac{2\pi(1)}{3} \approx 3.9936 $$

These additional angles are also angles within this range that the object stops
moving. Thusly we can say our object stops moving at the following angles within
the range of $[0, 4]$:

$$ \boxed{t = 0.1952, t = 1.8992, t = 2.2896, t = 3.9936} $$

**58.** Determine where $f(x) = 6\sin(2x) - 7\cos(2x) - 3$ is increasing and
decreasing in the interval $[-3, 2]$.

**Solution**

$$ f'(x) = \left[(6)'(\sin(2x)) + (6)(\sin(2x))'\right] - \left[(7)'(\cos(2x)) + (7)(\cos(2x))'\right] - 0 $$

$$ f'(x) = \left[(0)(\sin(2x)) + (6)(\cos(2x)(2x)')\right] - \left[(0)(\cos(2x)) + (7)(-\sin(2x)(2x)')\right] $$

$$ f'(x) = \left[(6)(\cos(2x)(2))\right] - \left[(7)(-\sin(2x)(2))\right] $$

$$ f'(x) = 12\cos(2x) + 14\sin(2x) $$

$$ f'(x) = 2(6\cos(2x) + 7\sin(2x)) $$

$$ 2(6\cos(2x) + 7\sin(2x)) = 0 $$

$$ 6\cos(2x) + 7\sin(2x) = 0 $$

$$ 6\cos(2x) = -7\sin(2x) $$

$$ \cos(2x) = -\frac{7}{6}\sin(2x) $$

$$ \frac{\cos(2x)}{\sin(2x)} = -\frac{7}{6} $$

$$ \frac{6\cos(2x)}{7\sin(2x)} = -1 $$

$$ \frac{6}{7} = -\frac{\sin(2x)}{\cos(2x)} $$

$$ \frac{\sin(2x)}{\cos(2x)} = -\frac{6}{7} $$

$$ \tan(2x) = -\frac{6}{7} $$

$$ \tan^{-1}\left(-\frac{6}{7}\right) = 2x \approx -0.7086  $$

Tangent is negative in Quadrants II and IV. Therefore our two angles in the
first revolution of the Unit Circle are:

$$ 2x = \pi - 0.7086 \approx 2.4330 $$

$$ 2x = 2\pi - 0.7086 \approx 5.5746 $$

This occurs every $2\pi$ intervals, so if we say that $n$ is an interval, we can
ascertain every angle of our function for $2x$ like so:

$$ 2x = 2.4330 + 2\pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

$$ 2x = 5.5746 + 2\pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

Evaluating further for $x$ we get:

$$ x = 1.2165 + \pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

$$ x = 2.7873 + \pi n \text{, } \quad n = 0, \pm 1, \pm 2, \dots $$

$x = 2.7873$ falls outside of the given interval $[-3, 2]$. Let's evaluate other
values of $n$ to find where else we'll need to further evaluate:

$$ x = 1.2165 + pi(-1) \approx -1.9251 $$

$$ x = 2.7873 + pi(-1) \approx -0.3543 $$

These are only other two angles for $x$ that fall into our range other than our
original one. Now we just have to plug values within these intervals in to
determine if they are increasing/decreasing within said ranges:

$$ -3 \leq x < -1.9251 \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ -1.9251 < x < -0.3543 \quad \text{ negative} $$

$$ -0.3543 < x < 1.2165 \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ 1.2165 < x \leq 2 \quad \text{ negative} $$

Thusly we can say that the function $f(x)$, within the interval of $[-3, 2]$ is:

$$ \text{increasing : } -3 \leq x < -1.9251 \quad \& \quad -0.3543 < x < 1.2165 $$

$$ \text{decreasing : } -1.9251 < x < -0.3543 \quad \& \quad 1.2165 < x \leq 2 $$

**59.** Determine where $H(w) = \left(w^2 - 1\right)\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2}$ is
increasing and decreasing.

**Solution**

$$ H'(w) = \left[\left(w^2 - 1\right)'\left(\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2}\right) + \left(w^2 - 1\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2}\right)'\right] $$

$$ H'(w) = \left[\left(2w - 0\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2}\right) + \left(w^2 - 1\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2}\left(2 - w^2\right)'\right)\right] $$

$$ H'(w) = \left[2w\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2} + \left(w^2 - 1\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2}\left(0 - 2w\right)\right)\right] $$

$$ H'(w) = \left[2w\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2} + \left(w^2 - 1\right)\left(-2w\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2}\right)\right] $$

$$ H'(w) = 2w\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2}\left[1 + \left(w^2 - 1\right)(-1)\right] $$

$$ H'(w) = 2w\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2}\left[1 + \left(-w^2 + 1\right)\right] $$

$$ H'(w) = 2w\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2}\left[1 - w^2 + 1\right] $$

$$ H'(w) = 2w\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2}\left[2 - w^2 \right] $$

$$ H'(w) = 2w\left(2 - w^2\right)\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2} $$

Note that $\mathbf{e}^{2 - w^2} > 0$ for every real $w$, so it never creates
$0$. Thusly we only need to evaluate:

$$ 2w\left(2 - w^2\right) = 0 $$

$$ 2w = 0 $$

$$ w = 0 $$

$$ 2 - w^2 = 0$$

$$ 2 = w^2 $$

$$ w = \pm \sqrt{2} \approx \pm 1.4142 $$

So we just need to evaluate along:

$$ -\infty < w < -\sqrt{2} \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ -\sqrt{2} < w < 0 \quad \text{ negative} $$

$$ 0 < w < \sqrt{2} \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ \sqrt{2} < w < \infty \quad \text{ negative} $$

So we can say that $H(w)$ is:

$$ \text{increasing : } -\infty < w < -\sqrt{2} \quad \& \quad 0 < w < \sqrt{2} $$

$$ \text{decreasing : } -\sqrt{2} < w < 0  \quad \& \quad \sqrt{2} < w < \infty $$

**60.** What percentage of $[-3, 5]$ is the function
$g(z) = \mathbf{e}^{z^2 - 8} + 3\mathbf{e}^{1 - 2z^2}$ decreasing?

**Solution**

$$ g'(z) = \mathbf{e}^{z^2 - 8} + \left[(3)'\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - 2z^2}\right) + (3)\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - 2z^2}\right)'\right]$$

$$ g'(z) = \mathbf{e}^{z^2 - 8} + \left[(0)\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - 2z^2}\right) + (3)\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - 2z^2}\left(1 - 2z^2\right)'\right)\right]$$

$$ g'(z) = \mathbf{e}^{z^2 - 8} + 3\left(\mathbf{e}^{1 - 2z^2}\left(0 - 4z\right)\right) $$

$$ g'(z) = \mathbf{e}^{z^2 - 8} - 12z\mathbf{e}^{1 - 2z^2} $$

$$ g'(z) < 0 \quad \Leftrightarrow \quad \mathbf{e}^{z^2 - 8} < 12z\mathbf{e}^{1 - 2z^2} $$

Since exponentials are always positive, we can divide safely, but note the sign
of $z$:

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to 0^-}\left(12z\mathbf{e}^{1 - 2z^2}\right) = 0^- $$

while

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to 0^-}\left(\mathbf{e}^{z^2 - 8}\right) = \mathbf{e}^{-8} > 0 $$

Thus for all $z \leq 0$:

$$ \mathbf{e}^{z^2 - 8} > 12z\mathbf{e}^{1 - 2z^2} $$

This indicates that the inequality $g'(z) < 0$ **cannot** hold.

From the right-hand side, however, it holds:

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to 0^+}\left(\mathbf{e}^{z^2 - 8}\right) = \mathbf{e}^{-8} \approx 0.0003 $$

$$ \lim\limits_{z \to 0^+}\left(12z\mathbf{e}^{1 - 2z^2}\right) = 0^+ $$

If we then simplify our inequality:

$$ \frac{\mathbf{e}^{z^2 - 8}}{\mathbf{e}^{1 - 2z^2}} < 12z $$

$$ \mathbf{e}^{(z^2 - 8) - (1 - 2z^2)} < 12z $$

$$ \mathbf{e}^{3z^2 - 9} < 12z $$

We can now plug in values for $z$ within the range of $[-3, 5]$ and see where
our inequality holds/fails:

$$ \mathbf{e}^{3(0)^2 - 9} < 12(0) \quad \text{ only true on } 0^+ $$

$$ \mathbf{e}^{3(1)^2 - 9} < 12(1) $$

$$ \mathbf{e}^{3(2)^2 - 9} < 12(2) $$

$$ \mathbf{e}^{3(2.1)^2 - 9} \cancel{<} 12(2.1) $$

We can then examine the inequality to find exactly where the inequality no
longer holds. If we get more and more precise, we find that the inequality
breaks at $z \approx 2.01$

The total length of the interval $[-3, 5]$ is:

$$ |-3 - 5| = 8 $$

And we can then find the percentage where $g(z)$ is decreasing by dividing the
breaking point by the total length of the interval:

$$ \text{Percentage } \approx \frac{2.01}{8} \cdot 100\% \approx \boxed{25\% \text{ of } [-3, 5]} $$

**61.** The position of an object is given by
$s(t) = \ln\left(2t^3 - 21t^2 + 36t +200\right)$. During the first 10 hours of
motion (assuming the motion starts at $t = 0$) what percentage of the time is
the object moving to the right?

**Solution**

$$ s'(t) = \frac{1}{2t^3 - 21t^2 + 36t + 200}\left(2t^3 - 21t^2 + 36t +200\right)' $$

$$ s'(t) = \frac{1}{2t^3 - 21t^2 + 36t + 200}\left(6t^2 - 42t + 36 + 0\right) $$

$$ s'(t) = \frac{6t^2 - 42t + 36}{2t^3 - 21t^2 + 36t + 200} $$

What we're asking is when $s'(t) > 0$ within the interval of $[0, 10]$.

So, set $s'(t)$ to 0$ to evaluate

$$ 6t^2 - 42t + 36 = 0 $$

$$ 6(t^2 - 7t + 6) = 0 $$

$$ t^2 - 7t + 6 = 0 $$

$$ (t - 6)(t - 1) = 0 $$

$$ t = 6 $$

$$ t = 1 $$

We then evaluate for $t$ within the interval $[0, 10]$:

$$ 0 \leq t < 1 \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ 1 < t < 6 \quad \text{ negative} $$

$$ 6 < t \leq 10 \quad \text{ positive} $$

If we add up the lengths of the interval for which this is positive, we add the
lengths of $[0, 1)$ and $(6, 10]$, which is $5$. Then divide by the total length
of the interval, $10$:

$$ \frac{5}{10} \cdot 100\% = \boxed{50\% \text{ of the interval } [0, 10] \text{ the object is moving right} } $$

**62.** For the function
$f(x) = 1 - \dfrac{x}{2} - \ln\left(2 + 9x - x^2\right)$ determine each of the
following.

**(a)** The interval on which the function is defined.

**Solution**

$$ f'(x) = 0 - \frac{1}{2} - \frac{1}{2 + 9x - x^2}\left(2 + 9x - x^2\right)' $$

$$ f'(x) = -\frac{1}{2} - \frac{1}{2 + 9x - x^2}\left(0 + 9 - 2x\right) $$

$$ f'(x) = -\frac{1}{2} - \frac{9 - 2x}{2 + 9x - x^2} $$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{-(2 + 9x - x^2) - 2(9 - 2x)}{2(2 + 9x - x^2)}$$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{-2 - 9x + x^2 - 18 + 4x}{4 + 18x - 2x^2}$$

$$ f'(x) = \frac{x^2 - 5x - 20}{-2x^2 + 18x + 4}$$

We can find where $f'(x)$ is **not defined** by evaluating the denominator for
$0$:

$$ -2x^2 + 18x + 4 = 0 $$

$$ 2x^2 - 18x - 4 = 0 $$

$$ x = \frac{-(-18) \pm \sqrt{(-18)^2 - 4(2)(-4)}}{2(2)} $$

$$ x = \frac{18 \pm 2\sqrt{89}}{4} $$

$$ x = \frac{9 \pm \sqrt{89}}{2} $$

$$ x = \frac{9 + \sqrt{89}}{2} \approx 9.2170 $$

$$ x = \frac{9 - \sqrt{89}}{2} \approx -0.2170 $$

Thusly we can say our function is defined on the interval of:

$$ \left(\frac{9 - \sqrt{89}}{2}, \frac{9 + \sqrt{89}}{2}\right) $$

**(b)** Where the function is increasing and decreasing.

**Solution**

We can then use these two points to say that this is where the function could
potentially "changes direction" from increasing to decreasing or visa versa.

$$ x < \frac{9 - \sqrt{89}}{2} \quad \text{ positive} $$

$$ \frac{9 - \sqrt{89}}{2} < x < \frac{9 + \sqrt{89}}{2} \quad \text{ negative} $$

$$ \frac{9 + \sqrt{89}}{2} < x < \infty \quad \text{ negative} $$

Thusly we can say that $f(x)$ is:

$$ \text{increasing : } x < \frac{9 - \sqrt{89}}{2} $$

$$ \text{decreasing : } \frac{9 - \sqrt{89}}{2} < x < \frac{9 + \sqrt{89}}{2} \quad \& \quad \frac{9 + \sqrt{89}}{2} < x < \infty $$
