# 3.4 The Definition Of A Function

We now need to move into the second topic of this chapter. Before we do that
however we need a quick definition taken care of.

**Definition of Relation**

> A **relation** is a set of ordered pairs.

This seems like an odd definition but we’ll need it for the definition of a
function (which is the main topic of this section). However, before we actually
give the definition of a function let’s see if we can get a handle on just what
a relation is.

Think back to
[Example 1](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/Alg/Graphing.aspx#Fcns_Graph_Ex1)
in the Graphing section of this chapter. In that example we constructed a set of
ordered pairs we used to sketch the graph of $y = (x - 1)^2 - 4$. Here are the
ordered pairs that we used.

$$ (-2, 5)\text{ }(-1, 0)\text{ }(0, -3)\text{ }(1, -4)\text{ }(2, -3)\text{ }(3, 0)\text{ }(4, 5) $$

Any of the following are then relations because they consist of a set of ordered
pairs.

$$ \{(-2, 5)\text{ }(-1, 0) \text{ }(2, -3)\} $$

$$ \{(-1, 0)\text{ }(0, -3)\text{ }(2, -3)\text{ }(3, 0)\text{ }(4, 5)\} $$

$$ \{(3, 0)\text{ }(4, 5)\} $$

$$ \{(-2, 5)\text{ }(-1, 0)\text{ }(0, -3)\text{ }(1, -4)\text{ }(2, -3)\text{ }(3, 0)\text{ }(4, 5)\} $$

There are of course many more relations that we could form from the list of
ordered pairs above, but we just wanted to list a few possible relations to give
some examples. Note as well that we could also get other ordered pairs from the
equation and add those into any of the relations above if we wanted to.

Now, at this point you are probably asking just why we care about relations and
that is a good question. Some relations are very special and are used at almost
all levels of mathematics. The following definition tells us just which
relations are these special relations.

**Definition of a Function**

> A **function** is a relation in which each value from the set of first
> components in the ordered pairs is associated with exactly one value from the
> set of second components.

Okay, that is a mouth full. Let’s see if we can figure out just what it means.
Let’s take a look at the following example that will hopefully help us figure
all this out.

---

**Example 1**

The following relation is a function.

$$ \{(-1, 0)\text{ }(0, -3)\text{ }(2, -3)\text{ }(3, 0)\text{ }(4, 5)\} $$

From these ordered pairs we have the following sets of first components (i.e.
the first number from each ordered pair) and second components (_i.e._ the
second number from each ordered pair).

$$ 1^{\text{st}} \text{components: } \{-1, 0, 2, 3, 4\} \text{ } 2^{\text{nd}}\text{components: } \{0, -3, 0, 5\}$$

For the set of second components notice that the “-3” occurred in two ordered
pairs but we only listed it once.

To see why this relation is a function simply pick any value from the set of
first components. Now, go back up to the relation and find every ordered pair in
which this number is the first component and list all the second components from
those ordered pairs. The list of second components will consist of exactly one
value.

For example, let’s choose 2 from the set of first components. From the relation
we see that there is exactly one ordered pair with 2 as a first
component,$(2,−3)$. Therefore, the list of second components (_i.e._ the list of
values from the set of second components) associated with 2 is exactly one
number, -3.

Note that we don’t care that -3 is the second component of a second ordered pair
in the relation. That is perfectly acceptable. We just don’t want there to be
any more than one ordered pair with 2 as a first component.

We looked at a single value from the set of first components for our quick
example here but the result will be the same for all the other choices.
Regardless of the choice of first components there will be exactly one second
component associated with it.

Therefore, this relation is a function.

---

n order to really get a feel for what the definition of a function is telling us
we should probably also check out an example of a relation that is not a
function.

---

**Example 2**

The following relation is not a function.

$$ \{(6, 10)\text{ }(-7, 3)\text{ }(0, 4)\text{ }(6, -4)\} $$

Don’t worry about where this relation came from. It is just one that we made up
for this example.

Here is the list of first and second components

$$ 1^{\text{st}}\text{components: } \{6, -7, 0\} \text{ } 2^{\text{nd}}\text{components: } \{10, 3, 4, -4\} $$

From the set of first components let’s choose 6. Now, if we go up to the
relation we see that there are two ordered pairs with 6 as a first component :
$(6,10)$ and $(6,−4)$. The list of second components associated with 6 is then :
10, -4.

The list of second components associated with 6 has two values and so this
relation is not a function.

Note that the fact that if we’d chosen -7 or 0 from the set of first components
there is only one number in the list of second components associated with each.
This doesn’t matter. The fact that we found even a single value in the set of
first components with more than one second component associated with it is
enough to say that this relation is not a function.

As a final comment about this example let’s note that if we removed the first
and/or the fourth ordered pair from the relation we would have a function!

---

So, hopefully you have at least a feeling for what the definition of a function
is telling us.

Now that we’ve forced you to go through the actual definition of a function
let’s give another “working” definition of a function that will be much more
useful to what we are doing here.

The actual definition works on a relation. However, as we saw with the four
relations we gave prior to the definition of a function and the relation we used
in Example 1 we often get the relations from some equation.

It is important to note that not all relations come from equations! The relation
from the second example for instance was just a set of ordered pairs we wrote
down for the example and didn’t come from any equation. This can also be true
with relations that are functions. They do not have to come from equations.

However, having said that, the functions that we are going to be using in this
course do all come from equations. Therefore, let’s write down a definition of a
function that acknowledges this fact.

Before we give the “working” definition of a function we need to point out that
this is NOT the actual definition of a function, that is given above. This is
simply a good “working definition” of a function that ties things to the kinds
of functions that we will be working with in this course.

**"Working Definition" of Function**

> A **function** is an equation for which any $x$ that can be plugged into the
> equation will yield exactly one $y$ out of the equation.

There it is. That is the definition of functions that we’re going to use and
will probably be easier to decipher just what it means.

Before we examine this a little more, note that we used the phrase “$x$ that can
be plugged into” in the definition. This tends to imply that not all $x$’s can
be plugged into an equation and this is in fact correct. We will come back and
discuss this in more detail towards the end of this section, however at this
point just remember that we can’t divide by zero and if we want real numbers out
of the equation we can’t take the square root of a negative number. So, with
these two examples it is clear that we will not always be able to plug in every
$x$ into any equation.

Further, when dealing with functions we are always going to assume that both $x$
and $y$ will be real numbers. In other words, we are going to forget that we
know anything about complex numbers for a little bit while we deal with this
section.

Okay, with that out of the way let’s get back to the definition of a function
and let’s look at some examples of equations that are functions and equations
that aren’t functions.

---

**Example 3**

Determine which of the following equations are functions and which are not
functions.

The “working” definition of function is saying is that if we take all possible
values of $x$ and plug them into the equation and solve for $y$ we will get
exactly one value for each value of $x$. At this stage of the game it can be
pretty difficult to actually show that an equation is a function so we’ll mostly
talk our way through it. On the other hand, it’s often quite easy to show that
an equation isn’t a function.

**(a)**

$$ y = 5x + 1 $$

$$ x = -4\text{: } y = 5(-4) + 1 = -20 + 1 = -19 $$

$$ x = 0\text{: } y = 5(0) + 1 = 0 + 1 = 1 $$

$$ x = 10\text{: } y = 5(10) + 1 = 50 + 1 = 51 $$

For every input of $x$, we get exactly _one_ output for $y$, thusly this
equation is a function.

**(b)**

$$ y = x^2 + 1 $$

$$ x = -1\text{: } y = (-1)^2 + 1 = 1 + 1 = 2 $$

$$ x = 3\text{: } y = (3)^2 + 1 = 9 + 1 = 10 $$

$$ x = -3\ext{: } y = (-3)^2 + 1 = 9 + 1 = 10 $$

Note that it is okay to get the same $y$ value for different $x$'s.

This equation is a function.

**(c\)**

$$ y^2 = x + 1 $$

$$ x = 3\text{: } y^2 = 3 + 1 = 4 \Rightarrow y = \pm 2 $$

$$ x = -1\text{: } y^2 = -1 + 1 = 0 \Rightarrow y = 0 $$

$$ x = 10\text{: } y^2 = 10 + 1 = 11 \Rightarrow y = \pm \sqrt{11} $$

Notice that the first and last cases above yield _two_ different outputs for $y$
for a single input of $x$, thusly this equationis NOT a function. We didn't even
have to demonstrate beyond the first case, as this immediately lets us know that
this equation is not a function.

**(d)**

$$ x^2 + y^2 = 4 $$

Here we are generally getting the idea that if we see a $y^2$, this is an
indication that this is likely NOT a function, as the
[square root property](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/Alg/SolveQuadraticEqnsI.aspx)
will always yield more than one value of $y$ if $y$ is not $0$.

$$ x = 0\text{: } 0^2 + y^2 = 4 \Rightarrow y^2 = 4 \Rightarrow y = \pm 2 $$

Thusly this equation is not a function. Note that this equation follows the
standard form of a circle, and this tells us that _Circles are never functions_.

---

Hopefully these examples have given you a better feel for what a function
actually is.

We now need to move onto something called **function notation**. Function
notation will be used heavily throughout most of the remaining chapters in this
course and so it is important to understand it.

Let’s start off with the following quadratic equation.

$$ y = x^2 - 5x + 3 $$

We can use a process similar to what we used in the previous set of examples to
convince ourselves that this is a function. Since this is a function we will
denote it as follows,

$$ f(x) = x^2 -5x + 3 $$

So we replaced the $y$ with the notation $f(x)$. This is read as "f of $x$".
Note that there is nothing special about the $f$ we used here. We could just
have easily used any of the following,

$$ g(x) = x^2 - 5x + 3 \text{ } h(x) = x^2 - 5x + 3 \text{ } R(x) = x^2 - 5x + 3 $$

The letter we use does not matter. What is important is the “$(x)$” part. The
letter in the parenthesis must match the variable used on the right side of the
equal sign.

It is very important to note that $f(x)$ is really nothing more than a really
fancy way of writing $y$. If you keep that in mind you may find that dealing
with function notation becomes a little easier.

Also, this is **NOT** a multiplication of $f$ by $x$! This is one of the more
common mistakes people make when they first deal with functions. This is just a
notation used to denote functions.

Next we need to talk about **evaluating functions**. Evaluating a function is
really nothing more than asking what its value is for specific values of $x$.
Another way of looking at it is that we are asking what the $y$ value for a
given $x$ is.

Evaluation is really quite simple. Let’s take the function we were looking at
above

$$ f(x) = x^2 -5x + 3 $$

and ask what its value is for $x = 4$. In terms of function notation we will
“ask” this using the notation $f(4)$. So, when there is something other than the
variable inside the parenthesis we are really asking what the value of the
function is for that particular quantity.

Now, when we say the value of the function we are really asking what the value
of the equation is for that particular value of $x$. Here is $f(4)$.

$$ f(4) = (4)^2 - 5(4) + 3 = 16 - 20 + 3 = -1 $$

Notice that evaluating a function is done in exactly the same way in which we
evaluate equations. All we do is plug in for $x$ whatever is on the inside of
the parenthesis on the left. Here’s another evaluation for this function.

$$ f(-6) = (-6)^2 + 5(-6) + 3 = 36 + 30 + 3 = 69 $$

So, again, whatever is on the inside of the parenthesis on the left is plugged
in for $x$ in the equation on the right. Let’s take a look at some more
examples.

---

**Example 4**

Given $f(x) = x^2 - 2x + 8$ and $g(x) = \sqrt{x + 6}$ evaluate each of the
following.

**(a)**

$f(3)$ and $g(3)$

$$ f(3) = (3)^2 - 2(3) + 8 = 9 - 6 + 8 = 11 $$

$$ g(3) = \sqrt{3 + 6} = \sqrt{9} = 3 $$

**(b)**

$f(-10)$ and $g(-10)$

$$ f(-10) = (-10)^2 - 2(-10) + 8 = 100 + 20 + 8 = 128 $$

$$ g(-10) = \sqrt{(-10) + 6} = \sqrt{-4} = 2i $$

Because we are not going to deal with complex numbers for functions, we simply
cannot plug $-10$ into the function $g$.

**(c\)**

$f(0)$

$$ f(0) = (0)^2 - 2(0) + 8 = 0 - 0 + 8 = 8 $$

**(d)**

$f(t)$

$$ f(t) = (t)^2 - 2(t) + 8  = t^2 - 2t + 8 $$

**(e)**

$f(t + 1)$ and $f(x + 1)$

$$ f(t + 1) = (t + 1)^2 - 2(t + 1) + 8 $$

$$ f(t + 1) = t^2 + 2t + 1 - 2t - 2 + 8 $$

$$ f(t + 1) = t^2 + 7 $$

$$ f(x + 1) = (x + 1)^2 - 2(x + 1) + 8 $$

$$ f(x + 1) = x^2 + 2x + 1 - 2x - 2 + 8 $$

$$ f(x + 1) = x^2 + 7 $$

**(f)**

$f(x^3)$

$$ f(x^3) = (x^3)^2 - 2(x^3) + 8 $$

$$ f(x^3) = x^6 - 2x^3 + 8 $$

**(g)**

$g(x^2 - 5)$

$$ g(x^2 - 5) = \sqrt{(x^2 - 5) + 6} $$

$$ g(x^2 - 5) = \sqrt{x^2 - 5 + 6} $$

$$ g(x^2 - 5) = \sqrt{x^2 + 1} $$

---

Function evaluation is something that we’ll be doing a lot of in later sections
and chapters so make sure that you can do it. You will find several later
sections very difficult to understand and/or do the work in if you do not have a
good grasp on how function evaluation works.

While we are on the subject of function evaluation we should now talk about
**piecewise functions**. We’ve actually already seen an example of a piecewise
function even if we didn’t call it a function (or a piecewise function) at the
time. Recall the mathematical definition of absolute value.

$$
|x| =
\begin{cases}
x & \text{if } x \geq 0 \\
-x & \text{if } x < 0
\end{cases}
$$

ahis is a function and if we use function notation we can write it as follows,

$$
f(x) =
\begin{cases}
x & \text{if } x \geq 0 \\
-x & \text{if } x < 0
\end{cases}
$$

This is also an example of a piecewise function. A piecewise function is nothing
more than a function that is broken into pieces and which piece you use depends
upon value of $x$. So, in the absolute value example we will use the top piece
if $x$ is positive or zero and we will use the bottom piece if $x$ is negative.

Let’s take a look at evaluating a more complicated piecewise function.

---

**Example 5**

Given,

$$
g(t) =
\begin{cases}
3^t2 + 4 & \text{if } t \leq -4 \\
10 & \text{if } -4 < t \leq 15 \\
1 - 6t & \text{if } t > 15
\end{cases}
$$

evaluate each of the following.

**(a)**

$g(-6)$

$$ g(-6) = 3(-6)^2 + 4 = 3(36) + 4 = 108 + 4 = 112 $$

**(b)**

$g(-4)$

$$ g(-4) = 3(-4)^2 + 4 = 3(16) + 4 = 48 + 4 = 52 $$

**(c\)**

$g(1)$

$$ g(1) = 10 $$

**(d)**

$g(15)$

$$ g(15) = 10 $$

**(e)**

$g(21)$

$$ g(21) = 1 - 6(21) = 1 - 126 = -125 $$

---

Piecewise functions do not arise all that often in an Algebra class however,
they do arise in several places in later classes and so it is important for you
to understand them if you are going to be moving on to more math classes.

As a final topic we need to come back and touch on the fact that we can’t always
plug every $x$ into every function. We talked briefly about this when we gave
the definition of the function and we saw an example of this when we were
evaluating functions. We now need to look at this in a little more detail.

First, we need to get a couple of definitions out of the way.

**Domain and Range**

> The **domain** of an equation is the set of all $x$'s that we can plug into
> the equation and get back a real number for $y$. The **range** of an equation
> is the set of all $y$'s that we can ever get out of the equation.

Note that we did mean to use equation in the definitions above instead of
functions. These are really definitions for equations. However, since functions
are also equations we can use the definitions for functions as well.

Determining the range of an equation/function can be pretty difficult to do for
many functions and so we aren’t going to really get into that. We are much more
interested here in determining the domains of functions. From the definition the
domain is the set of all $x$’s that we can plug into a function and get back a
real number. At this point, that means that we need to avoid division by zero
and taking square roots of negative numbers.

Let’s do a couple of quick examples of finding domains.

---

**Example 6**

Determine the domain of each of the following functions.

The domains for these functions are all the values of $x$ for which we don’t
have division by zero or the square root of a negative number. If we remember
these two ideas finding the domains will be pretty easy.

**(a)**

$$ g(x) = \frac{x + 3}{x^2 + 3x - 10} $$

$$ x^2 + 3x - 10 = 0 $$

$$ (x + 5)(x - 2) = 0 $$

$$ x = -5, x = 2 $$

$$ \text{Domain: All real numbers except } x = -5 \text{ and } x = 2 $$

**(b)**

$$ f(x) = \sqrt{5 - 3x} $$

To avoid square roots of negative numbers all that we need to do is require that

$$ 5 - 3x \geq 0 $$

This is a fairly simple linear equality that we should be able to solve at this
point.

$$ 5 \geq 3x \Rightarrow \frac{5}{3} \geq x \Rightarrow x \leq \frac{5}{3} $$

The domain of this function is then,

$$ \text{Domain: } x \leq \frac{5}{3} $$

**(c\)**

$$ h(x) = \frac{\sqrt{7x + 8}}{x^2 + 4} $$

In this case we've got a fraction, but notice that the denominator will never be
zero for anyr eal number since $x^2$ is guaranteed to be positive or zero and
adding $4$ onto this will mean that the denominator is always at least $4$. In
other words, the denominator won't ever be zero. SO, all we need to do then is
worry about the square root in the numerator.

To do this, we require,

$$ 7x + 8 \geq 0 $$

$$ 7x \geq -8 $$

$$ x \geq -\frac{8}{7} $$

$$ \text{Domain: } x \geq -\frac{8}{7} $$

**(d)**

$$ R(x) = \frac{\sqrt{10x - 5}}{x^2 -  16} $$

In this final part we've got both a square root and division by zero to worry
about. Let's take care oof the square root first since this will probably put
the largest restriction on the values of $x$. So, to keep the square root happy
(_i.e._ no square root of negative numbers) we'll need to require that,

$$ 10x - 5 \geq 0 $$

$$ 10x \geq 5 $$

$$ x \geq \frac{1}{2} $$

So, at the least we'll need to require that $x \geq \dfrac{1}{2}$ in order to
avoid problems with the square root.

Now, let's see if we have any division by zero problems. Again, to do this
simply set the denominator equal to zero and solve.

$$ x^2 - 16 = 0 $$

$$ (x + 4)(x - 4) = 0 $$

$$ x = -4, \text{ } x= 4 $$

Now, notice that $x = -4$ doesn't satisfy the inequality we need for the square
root and so that value of $x$ has already been excluded by the square root. On
the other hand, $x = 4$ does satisfy the inequality. This means that it is okay
to plug $x = 4$ into the square root, however, since it would give division by
zero we will need to avoid it.

The domain for this function is then,

$$ \text{Domain: } x \geq \frac{1}{2} \text{ except } x = 4 $$

---

## Practice Problems

For problems 1 - 3 determine if the given relation is a function.

**1.**

$$ \{(2, 4), (3, -7), (6, 10)\} $$

$$ 1^{\text{st}}\text{ components: } \{2, 3, 6\} \text{ } 2^{\text{nd}}\text{ components: } \{4, -7, 10\} $$

Yes, since there is directly one input for every output, this relation **IS** a
function.

**2.**

$$ \{(-1, 8), (4, -7), (-1, 6), (0, 0)\} $$

$$ 1^{\text{st}}\text{ components: } \{-1, 0, 4\} \text{ } 2^{\text{nd}}\text{ comnponents: } \{-7, 0, 6, 8\} $$

Since choosing $-1$ from the list of first components yields two ordered pairs,
one with $6$ and the other with $8$, this relation yields two outputs for a
single output, and therefore is **NOT** a function.

**3.**

$$ \{(2, 1), (9, 10), (-4, 10), (-8, 1)\} $$

$$ 1^{\text{st}}\text{ components: } \{-8, -4, 2, 9\} \text{ } 2^{\text{nd}}\text{ comnponents: } \{1, 10\} $$

Even though multiple inputs yield the same output, no single input yields more
than a single output. Therefore this relation **IS** a function.

For problems 4 - 6 determine if the given equation is a function.

**4.**

$$ y = 14 - \frac{1}{3}x $$

$$ x = 3\text{: } y = 14 - \frac{1}{3}(3) = 14 - 1 = 13 $$

$$ x = 0\text{: } y = 14 - \frac{1}{3}(0) = 14 - 0 = 14 $$

$$ x = -3\text{: } y = 14 - \frac{1}{3}(-3) = 14 + 1 = 15 $$

Every single input yields only one output, so therefore the equation **IS** a
function.

**5.**

$$ y = \sqrt{3x^2 + 1} $$

Because $x$ is always squared, $3x^2$ will always yield a positive number or
$0$. Because we then add $1$ to this result, we will always take the square root
of a positive number (_i.e._ it will always return a _real number_).
Additionally, taking the square root does not indicate a $\pm$ result as the
square root is already invoked for us without adding to it, indicating that the
result of the square root will always be positive. This equation will always
yield a positive real number. This equation **IS** a function.

**6.**

$$ y^4 - x^2 = 16 $$

$$ y^4 = x^2 + 16 $$

If we plug in $0$ for $x$:

$$ y^4 = (0)^2 + 16 $$

$$ y^4 = 16 $$

But since $y$ has an even exponent, this means:

$$ (-2)^4 = 16 \text{ and } (2)^4 = 16 $$

Thusly one single input for $x$ can yield two different outputs for $y$, meaning
that this equation is **NOT** a function.

**7.**

Given $f(x) = 3 - 2x^2$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $f(0)$

$$ f(0) = 3 - 2(0)^2  = 3 - 2(0) = 3 - 0 = 3 $$

**(b)** $f(2)$

$$ f(2) = 3 - 2(2)^2 = 3 - 2(4) = 3 - 8 = -5 $$

**(c\)** $f(-4)$

$$ f(-4) = 3 - 2(-4)^2 = 3 - 2(16) = 3 - 32 = -29 $$

**(d)** $f(3t)$

$$ f(3t) = 3 - 2(3t)^2 = 3 - 2(9t^2) = 3 - 18t^2 $$

**(e)** $f(x + 2)$

$$ f(x + 2) = 3 - 2(x + 2)^2 = 3 - 2(x^2 + 4x + 4) = 3 - 2x^2 - 8x - 8 = -2x^2 -8x -5$$

**8.**

Given $g(w) = \dfrac{4}{w + 1}$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $g(-6)$

$$ g(-6) = \frac{4}{(-6) + 1} $$

$$ g(-6) = \frac{4}{-5} = -\frac{4}{5} $$

**(b)** $g(-2)$

$$ g(-2) = \frac{4}{(-2) + 1} $$

$$ g(-2) = \frac{4}{-1} = -4 $$

**(c\)** $g(0)$

$$ g(0) = \frac{4}{(0) + 1} $$

$$ g(0) = \frac{4}{1} = 4 $$

**(d)** $g(t - 1)$

$$ g(t - 1) = \frac{4}{(t - 1) + 1} $$

$$ g(t - 1) = \frac{4}{t} $$

**(e)** $g(4w + 3)$

$$ g(4w + 3) = \frac{4}{(4w + 3) + 1} $$

$$ g(4w + 3) = \frac{4}{4w + 4} = \frac{4}{4(w + 1)} = \frac{1}{w + 1} $$

**9.**

Given $h(t) = t^2 + 6$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $h(0)$

$$ h(0) = (0)^2 + 6 = 0 + 6 = 6 $$

**(b)** $h(-2)$

$$ h(-2) = (-2)^2 + 6  = 4 + 6 = 10 $$

**(c\)** $h(2)$

$$ h(2) = (2)^2 + 6 = 4 + 6 = 10 $$

**(d)** $h(\sqrt{x})$

$$ h(\sqrt{x}) = (\sqrt{x})^2 + 6 = x + 6 $$

**(e)** $h(3 - t)$

$$ h(3 - t) = (3 - t)^2 + 6 = (3 - t)(3 - t) + 6 = 9 - 6t + t^2 + 6 = t^2 - 6t + 15 $$

**10.**

Given $h(x) =
\begin{cases}
3z & \text{if } z < 2 \\
1 + z^2 & \text{if } z \geq 2
\end{cases}$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $h(0)$

$$ h(0) = 3(0) = 0 $$

**(b)** $h(2)$

$$ h(2) = 1 + (2)^2 = 1 + 4 = 5 $$

**(c\)** $h(7)$

$$ h(7) = 1 + (7)^2 = 1 + 49 = 50 $$

**11.**

Given $f(x) =
\begin{cases}
6 & \text{if } x \geq 9 \\
x + 9 & \text{if } 2 < x < 9 \\
x^2 & \text{if } x \leq 2
\end{cases}$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $f(-4)$

$$ f(-4) = (-4)^2 = 16 $$

**(b)** $f(2)$

$$ f(2) = (2)^2 = 4 $$

**(c\)** $f(6)$

$$ f(6) = 6 + 9 = 15 $$

**(d)** $f(9)$

$$ f(9) = 6 $$

**(e)** $f(12)$

$$ f(12) = 6 $$

For problems 12 & 13 compute the difference quotient for the given function. The
difference quotient for the function $f(x)$ is defined to be,

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} $$

**12.**

$$ f(x) = 4 - 9x $$

$$ f(x + h) = 4 - 9(x + h) $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = (4 - 9(x + h)) - (4 - 9x) $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = 4 - 9x - 9h - 4 + 9x  $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = \cancel{4} \cancel{- 9x} - 9h \cancel{- 4} \cancel{+ 9x}  $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = -9h $$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = \frac{-9h}{h} = -9 $$

**13.**

$$ f(x) = 2x^2 - x $$

$$ f(x + h) = 2(x + h)^2 - (x + h) $$

$$ f(x + h) = 2(x + h)(x + h) - (x + h) $$

$$ f(x + h) = 2(x^2 + 2xh + h^2)- (x + h) $$

$$ f(x + h) = 2x^2 + 4xh + 2h^2 - x - h $$

$$ f(x + h) = 2x^2 + 2h^2 + 4xh - x - h $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = (2x^2 + 2h^2 + 4xh - x - h) - (2x^2 - x) $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = 2x^2 + 2h^2 + 4xh - x - h - 2x^2 + x $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = \cancel{2x^2} + 2h^2 + 4xh \cancel{- x} - h \cancel{- 2x^2} \cancel{+ x} $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = 2h^2 + 4xh - h $$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = \frac{2h^2 + 4xh - h}{h} = 2h + 4x - 1 $$

For problems 14 - 18 determine the domain of the function.

**14.**

$$ A(x) = 6x + 14 $$

Since $x$ isn't part of a denominator nor is it part of a square or square root,
there is no number where $x$ could be plugged in and a real number would not
come out. Therefore,

$$ \text{Domain: all real numbers } $$

**15.**

$$ f(x) = \frac{1}{x^2 - 25} $$

Since $x^2 - 25$ means we could plug in either $5$ or $-5$ for $x$ and get a
division by $0$ error, we can define the domain as:

$$ \text{Domain: all real numbers except } x = \pm 5 $$

**16.**

$$ g(t) = \frac{8t - 24}{t^2 - 7t - 18} $$

$$ t^2 - 7t - 18 = 0 $$

$$ (t - 9)(t + 2) = 0 $$

The numerator presents no issue, as any number we plug in for $t$ in $8t - 24$
will always yield a _real solution_. Therefore the only limitation to our domain
is the denominator, which cannot have a number plugged in for $t$ and have it
equal $0$. Therefore,

$$ \text{Domain: all real numbers except for } t = 9 \text{ and } t = -2 $$

**17.**

$$ g(w) = \sqrt{9w + 7} $$

Whatever comes out of our square root must be a _real number_. Thusly our only
constraint is:

$$ 9w + 7 \geq 0 $$

Solving this inequality yields:

$$ 9w \geq -7 $$

$$ w \geq -\frac{7}{9} $$

Thusly our domain can be defined as:

$$ \text{Domain: } w \geq -\frac{7}{9} $$

**18.**

$$ f(x) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{x^2 - 8x + 15}} $$

Here our denominator can't equal $0$ _and_ the square root it yields must be a
_real number_. This means that the radicand must also be greater than $0$.

$$ x^2 - 8x + 15 > 0 $$

$$ (x - 5)(x - 3) > 0 $$

Test Cases:

$$ x = -2 $$

$$ (-2 - 5)(-2 - 3) > 0 $$

$$ (-7)(-5) > 0 $$

$$ 35 > 0 \text{ TRUE} $$

$$ x = 4 $$

$$ (4 - 5)(4 - 3) > 0 $$

$$ (-1)(1) > 0 $$

$$ -1 > 0 \text{ FALSE} $$

$$ x = 6 $$

$$ (6 - 5)(6 - 3) > 0 $$

$$ (1)(3) > 0 $$

$$ 3 > 0 \text{ TRUE} $$

Thusly the range of our domain is:

$$ \text{Domain: } x < 3 \text{ and } x > 5 $$

---

## Assignment Problems

For problems 1 - 6 determine if the given relation is a function.

**1.**

$$ \{(0, 1), (2, 6), (9, 4), (7, 2), (12, 3)\} $$

$$ 1^{\text{st}}\text{ components: } \{0, 2, 7, 9, 12\} \text{ } 2^{\text{nd}}\text{ components: } \{1, 2, 3, 4, 6
\} $$

Because each input has only a single output, this relation **IS** a function.

**2.**

$$ \{(-4, 1), (-2, 1), (0, 1), (3, 1)\} $$

$$ 1^{\text{st}}\text{ components: } \{-4, -2, 0, 3\} \text{ } 2^{\text{nd}}\text{ components: } \{1\} $$

Because each input corresponds to a single output, this relation **IS** a
function.

**3.**

$$ \{(0, 4), (0, 6), (0, 8)\} $$

$$ 1^{\text{st}}\text{ components: } \{0\} \text{ } 2^{\text{nd}}\text{ components: } \{4, 6, 8\} $$

Because one input corresponds to multiple outputs, this relation is **NOT** a
function.

**4.**

$$ \{(1, 6), (-3, 4), (7, 6), (2, -10)\} $$

$$ 1^{\text{st}}\text{ components: } \{-3, 1, 2, 7\} \text{ } 2^{\text{nd}}\text{ components: } \{-10, 4, 6\} $$

Because each input corresponds to a single output, this relation **IS** a
function.

**5.**

$$ \{(0, 1), (2, 3), (4, 5), (6, 7), (8, 9), (10, 11), (12, 13)\} $$

$$ 1^{\text{st}}\text{ components: } \{0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12\} \text{ } 2^{\text{nd}}\text{ components: } \{1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13\} $$

Because each input corresponds to a single output, this relation **IS** a
function.

**6.**

$$ \{(-7, 0), (4, 2), (4, 1), (-2, 3), (6, 0)\} $$

$$ 1^{\text{st}}\text{ components: } \{-7, -2, 4, 6\} \text{ } 2^{\text{nd}}\text{ components: } \{0, 2, 1, 3\} $$

Because $4$ corresponds to both $2$ and $1$, this relation is **NOT** a
function.

For problems 7 - 13 determine if the given equation is a function.

**7.**

$$ y = \frac{2}{5}x + \frac{7}{5} $$

Because $x$ can never be a complex number, any real number could be plugged in
for $x$. Therefore this equation **IS** a function.

**8.**

$$ y = 3x^2 + 4x + 1 $$

This is a quadratic equation. Quadratic equations are always functions as there
is no ambiguity as to what $x$ will return when solving for $y$. For every input
of $x$, there is always one output for $y$, thusly this equation **IS** a
function.

**9.**

$$ y = 2 - x^4 $$

This is a polynomial equation. No matter what one inputs for $x$, one will
receive one output for $y$. Therefore this equation **IS** a function.

**10.**

$$ y^2 = 10 - 3x $$

Because $y$ is squared, in order to solve for $y$ requires us to take the square
root on the other side of the equation:

$$ \sqrt{y^2} = \pm \sqrt{10 - 3x} $$

Because our result could be either positive or negative (_i.e._ $\pm$), we
receive two outputs for a single input of $x$. Therefore this equation is
**NOT** a function.

**11.**

$$ y^2 = x^2 + 1 $$

Again, in order to solve for $y$, we must take the square root of $y$, which
yields both a positive and negative result for a single input of $x$:

$$ \sqrt{y^2} = \pm \sqrt{x^2 + 1} $$

Because we are receiving two outputs for a single input of $x$, this equation is
**NOT** a function.

**12.**

$$ y^4 + x^3 = 1 $$

This is similar actually to the previous two problems. Because the exponent for
$y$ is _even_, the result of solving for $y$ will always yield both a positive
and negative output:

$$ \sqrt[4]{y^4} = \pm \sqrt[4]{1 - x^3} $$

Thusly this equation is **NOT** a function.

**13.**

$$ y^3 + x^4 = 1 $$

This is different, because the exponent for $y$ is _odd_, it will yield _either_
a positive or negative output, but not both:

$$ \sqrt[3]{y^3} = \sqrt[3]{1 - x^4} $$

Depending on the sign of what is returned from $1 - x^4$ will determine the sign
of the output for $y$. Thusly there is one output for $y$ from a single input
for $x$. Therefore this equation **IS** a function.

**14.**

Given $A(t) = 7t + 2$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $A(-9)$

$$ A(-9) = 7(-9) + 2 $$

$$ A(-9) = -63 + 2 = -61 $$

**(b)** $A(0)$

$$ A(0) = 7(0) + 2 $$

$$ A(0) = 0 + 2 = 2 $$

**(c\)** $A(2)$

$$ A(2) = 7(2) + 2 $$

$$ A(2) = 14 + 2 = 16 $$

**(d)** $A(6x)$

$$ A(6x) = 7(6x) + 2 $$

$$ A(6x) = 42x + 2 $$

**(e)** $A(t^2 + 1)$

$$ A(t^2 + 1) = 7(t^2 + 1) + 2 $$

$$ A(t^2 + 1) = 7t^2 + 7 + 2 = 7t^2 + 9 $$

**15.**

Given $f(x) = \dfrac{3}{x}$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $f(-4)$

$$ f(-4) = \frac{3}{(-4)}  = -\frac{3}{4} $$

**(b)** $f\left(\dfrac{1}{3}\right)$

$$ f\left(\frac{1}{3}\right) = \frac{3}{\dfrac{1}{3}} = 9 $$

**(c\)** $f\left(\dfrac{6}{7}\right)$

$$ f\left(\frac{6}{7}\right) = \frac{3}{\dfrac{6}{7}} = \frac{21}{6} = \frac{7}{2} $$

**(d)** $f(4t + 2)$

$$ f(4t + 2) = \frac{3}{(4t + 2)} = \frac{3}{4t + 2} $$

**(e)** $f\left(\dfrac{6}{x}\right)$

$$ f\left(\frac{6}{x}\right) = \frac{3}{\dfrac{6}{x}} = \frac{3x}{6} = \frac{1}{2}x $$

**16.**

Given $h(w) = \sqrt{2w + 10}$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $h(-1)$

$$ h(-1) = \sqrt{2(-1) + 10} $$

$$ h(-1) = \sqrt{-2 + 10} = \sqrt{8} = \sqrt{4(2)} = 2\sqrt{2} $$

**(b)** $h(0)$

$$ h(0) = \sqrt{2(0) + 10} = \sqrt{0 + 10} = \sqrt{10} $$

**(c\)** $h(3)$

$$ h(3) = \sqrt{2(3) + 10} = \sqrt{6 + 10} = \sqrt{16} = 4 $$

**(d)** $h(-2t)$

$$ h(-2t) = \sqrt{2(-2t) + 10} $$

$$ h(-2t) = \sqrt{-4t + 10} $$

**(e)** $h(w + 4)$

$$ h(w + 4) = \sqrt{2(w + 4) + 10} $$

$$ h(w + 4) = \sqrt{2w + 8 + 10} = \sqrt{2w + 18} $$

**17.**

Given $P(x) = 3 - 2x - x^2$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $P(-6)$

$$ P(-6) = 3 - 2(-6) - (-6)^2 $$

$$ P(-6) = 3 + 12 - (36) $$

$$ P(-6) = 15 - 36 $$

$$ P(-6) = -21 $$

**(b)** $P(0)$

$$ P(0) = 3 - 2(0) - (0)^2 $$

$$ P(0) = 3 - 0 - 0 $$

$$ P(0) = 3 $$

**(c\)** $P(3)$

$$ P(3) = 3 - 2(3) - (3)^2 $$

$$ P(3) = 3 - 6 - 9 $$

$$ P(3) = -3 - 9 $$

$$ P(3) = -12 $$

**(d)** $P(z^2)$

$$ P(z^2) = 3 - 2(z^2) - (z^2)^2 $$

$$ P(z^2) = 3 - 2z^2 - z^4 $$

**(e)** $P(4 - x)$

$$ P(4 - x) = 3 - 2(4 - x) - (4 - x)^2 $$

$$ P(4 - x) = 3 - 8 + 2x - (4 - x)(4 - x) $$

$$ P(4 - x) = -5 + 2x - (16 - 8x + x^2) $$

$$ P(4 - x) = -5 + 2x - 16 + 8x - x^2 $$

$$ P(4 - x) = -21 + 10x - x^2 $$

**18.**

Given $f(z) = 2z^3 - z^2$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $f(-1)$

$$ f(-1) = 2(-1)^3 - (-1)^2 $$

$$ f(-1) = 2(-1) - (1) $$

$$ f(-1) = -2 - 1 = -3 $$

**(b)** $f(0)$

$$ f(0) = 2(0)^3 - (0)^2 $$

$$ f(0) = 2(0) - 0 $$

$$ f(0) = 0 - 0 = 0 $$

**(c\)** $f(4)$

$$ f(4) = 2(4)^3 - (4)^2 $$

$$ f(4) = 2(64) - 16 $$

$$ f(4) = 128 - 16 = 112 $$

**(d)** $f\left(\dfrac{1}{2}t\right)$

$$ f\left(\frac{1}{2}\right) = 2\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)^3 - \left(\frac{1}{2}\right)^2 $$

$$ f\left(\frac{1}{2}\right) = 2\left(\frac{1}{8}\right) - \left(\frac{1}{4}\right) $$

$$ f\left(\frac{1}{2}\right) = \frac{2}{8} - \frac{2}{8} $$

$$ f\left(\frac{1}{2}\right) = 0 $$

**(e)** $f(z - 1)$

$$ f(z - 1) = 2(z - 1)^3 - (z - 1)^2 $$

$$ f(z - 1) = 2(z - 1)(z - 1)(z - 1) - (z - 1)(z - 1) $$

$$ f(z - 1) = 2(z^2 - 2z + 1)(z - 1) - (z^2 - 2z + 1) $$

$$ f(z - 1) = 2(z^2(z - 1) - 2z(z - 1) + 1(z - 1)) - (z^2 - 2z + 1) $$

$$ f(z - 1) = 2(z^3 - z^2 - 2z^2 + 2z + z - 1) - (z^2 - 2z + 1) $$

$$ f(z - 1) = 2(z^3 - 3z^2 + 3z - 1) - (z^2 - 2z + 1) $$

$$ f(z - 1) = 2z^3 - 6z^2 + 6z - 2 - z^2 + 2z - 1 $$

$$ f(z - 1) = 2z^3 - 7z^2 + 8z - 3 $$

**19.** Given $g(t) =
\begin{cases}
2 + t & \text{if } t \geq 10 \\
t - 7 & \text{if } t < 10
\end{cases}$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $g(14)$

$$ g(14) = 2 + 14 = 16 $$

**(b)** $g(10)$

$$ g(10) = 2 + 10 = 12 $$

**(c\)** $g(-1)$

$$ g(-1) = -1 - 7 = -8 $$

**20.**

Given $f(x) =
\begin{cases}
4x^2 & \text{if } x < -4 \\
6x & \text{if } x \geq -4
\end{cases}$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $f(-6)$

$$ f(-6) = 4(-6)^2 = 4(36) = 144 $$

**(b)** $f(-4)$

$$ f(-4) = 6(-4) = -24 $$

**(c\)** $f(3)$

$$ f(3) = 6(3) = 18 $$

**21.**

Given $g(x) =
\begin{cases}
\dfrac{1}{2}x & \text{if } x \leq 7 \\
x^2 + 1 & \text{if } 7 < x < 11 \\
3 - x & \text{if } x \geq 11
\end{cases}$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $g(2)$

$$ g(2) = \frac{1}{2}(2) = 1 $$

**(b)** $g(7)$

$$ g(7) = \frac{1}{2}(7) = \frac{7}{2} $$

**(c\)** $g(8)$

$$ g(8) = (8)^2 + 1 = 64 + 1 = 65 $$

**(d)** $g(11)$

$$ g(11) = 3 - 11 = -8 $$

**(e)** $g(14)$

$$ g(14) = 3 - 14 = -11  $$

**22.**

Given $A(w) =
\begin{cases}
12 & \text{if } w > -8 \\
2 + 3w & \text{if } -10 \leq w \leq -8 \\
-1 & \text{if } w < -10
\end{cases}$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $A(-12)$

$$ A(-12) = -1 $$

**(b)** $A(-10)$

$$ A(-10) = 2 + 3(-10) = 2 - 30 = -28 $$

**(c\)** $A(-9)$

$$ A(-9) = 2 + 3(-9) = 2 - 27 = -25 $$

**(d)** $A(-8)$

$$ A(-8) = 2 + 3(-8) = 2 - 24 = -22 $$

**(e)** $A(0)$

$$ A(0) = 12 $$

**23.**

Given $f(x) =
\begin{cases}
2x & \text{if } x < 6 \\
4 + x & \text{if } x = 6 \\
x^2 & \text{if } x > 6
\end{cases}$ determine each of the following.

**(a)** $f(0)$

$$ f(0) = 2(0) = 0 $$

**(b)** $f(2)$

$$ f(2) = 2(2) = 4 $$

**(c\)** $f(6)$

$$ f(6) = 4 + 6 = 10 $$

**(d)** $f(8)$

$$ f(8) = 8^2 = 64 $$

**(e)** $f(10)$

$$ f(10) = 10^2 = 100 $$

For problems 24 - 28 compute the difference quotient for the given function. The
difference quotient for the function $f(x)$ is defined to be,

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} $$

**24.**

$$ f(x) = 8x - 1 $$

$$ f(x + h) = 8(x + h) - 1 = 8x + 8h - 1$$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = (8x + 8h - 1) - (8x - 1) $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = 8x + 8h - 1 - 8x - 1 $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = 8h - 2 $$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = \frac{8h - 2}{h} $$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = 8 - \frac{2}{h} $$

**25.**

$$ f(x) = 3x^2 $$

$$ f(x + h) = 3(x + h)^2 $$

$$ f(x + h) = 3(x + h)(x + h) $$

$$ f(x + h) = 3(x^2 + 2xh + h^2) $$

$$ f(x + h) = 3x^2 + 6xh + 3h^2 $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = (3x^2 + 6xh + 3h^2) - (3x^2) $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = 3x^2 + 6xh + 3h^2 - 3x^2 $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = 6xh + 3h^2 $$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = \frac{6xh + 3h^2}{h} $$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = 6x + 3h $$

**26.**

$$ f(x) = 7 - x^2 $$

$$ f(x + h) = 7 - (x + h)^2 $$

$$ f(x + h) = 7 - (x + h)(x + h) $$

$$ f(x + h) = 7 - (x^2 + 2xh + h^2) $$

$$ f(x + h) = 7 - x^2 - 2xh - h^2 $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = (7 - x^2 - 2xh - h^2) - (7 - x^2) $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = 7 - x^2 - 2xh - h^2 - 7 + x^2 $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = -2xh - h^2 $$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = \frac{-2xh - h^2}{h} $$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = -2x - h $$

**27.**

$$ f(x) = 3x^2 + 7x - 4 $$

$$ f(x + h) = 3(x + h)^2 + 7(x + h) - 4 $$

$$ f(x + h) = 3(x + h)(x + h) + 7(x + h) - 4 $$

$$ f(x + h) = 3(x^2 + 2xh + h^2) + 7x + 7h - 4 $$

$$ f(x + h) = 3x^2 + 6xh + 3h^2 + 7x + 7h - 4 $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = (3x^2 + 6xh + 3h^2 + 7x + 7h - 4) - (3x^2 + 7x - 4) $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = 3x^2 + 6xh + 3h^2 + 7x + 7h - 4 - 3x^2 - 7x + 4 $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = \cancel{3x^2} + 6xh + 3h^2 \cancel{+ 7x} + 7h \cancel{- 4} - \cancel{3x^2} \cancel{- 7x} \cancel{+ 4} $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = 6xh + 3h^2 + 7h $$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = \frac{6xh + 3h^2 + 7h}{h} $$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = 6x + 3h + 7 $$

**28.**

$$ f(x) = \frac{2}{x} $$

$$ f(x + h) = \frac{2}{x + h} $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = \frac{2}{x + h} - \frac{2}{x} $$

$$ LCD = x(x + h) $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = (x)\left(\frac{2}{x + h}\right) - \left(\frac{2}{x}\right)(x + h) $$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) =  \frac{2x - 2(x + h)}{x(x + h)}$$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = \frac{2x - 2x - 2h}{x(x + h)}$$

$$ f(x + h) - f(x) = \frac{-2h}{x(x + h)}$$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = \frac{\dfrac{-2h}{x(x + h)}}{h} $$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = \frac{-2h}{h(x)(x + h)} $$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = \frac{-2}{x(x + h)} $$

$$ \frac{f(x + h) - f(x)}{h} = -\frac{2}{x^2 + xh} $$

For problems 29 - 39 determine the domain of the function.

**29.**

$$ f(x) = 9 - x $$

Since the output of $f(x)$ will always be a real number, so thusly is the
domain.

$$ \text{Domain: all real numbers} $$

**30.**

$$ P(z) = z^2 - 4 $$

Since $z^2$ is always guaranteed to be positive, $P(z)$ will always output a
real number, thusly the domain:

$$ \text{Domain: all real numbers} $$

**31.**

$$ h(x) = \frac{2 + x}{8x - 1} $$

Here we cannot divide by 0. We can determine the value of $x$ that cannot be
within our domain by solving:

$$ 8x - 1 = 0 $$

$$ 8x = 1 $$

$$ x = \frac{1}{8} $$

Thusly our domain is:

$$ \text{Domain: all real numbers except where } x = \frac{1}{8} $$

**32.**

$$ A(t) = \frac{t^2 - 4}{t^2 + 6t - 7} $$

Here we have a quadratic function in the denominator, indicating we have at
least two values for $t$ that cannot be within our domain. Let us solve our
quadratic function to determine these values.

$$ t^2 + 6t - 7 = 0 $$

$$ (t + 7)(t - 1) = 0 $$

Therefore $-7$ and $1$ cannot be within our domain.

$$ \text{Domain: all real numbers except where } x = -7 \text{ and } x = 1 $$

**33.**

$$ h(w) = \frac{w^2 + 3w + 2}{w^2 + 12w + 36} $$

Similarly to our previous problem, we have a quadratic formula on our
denominator. Let's determine which values of $w$ would cause the denominator to
be $0$:

$$ w^2 + 12w + 36 = 0$$

$$ (w + 6)(w + 6) = 0 $$

Ah, a perfect square quadratic. Thusly so far the only value that must remain
outside our domain is when $w$ equals $-6$.

$$ \text{Domain: all real numbers except where } w = -6 $$

**34.**

$$ g(x) = \sqrt{10x - 15} $$

Here we must exclude all non-real numbers from our domain, thusly the radicand
cannot return a negative number:

$$ 10x - 15 \geq 0 $$

$$ 10x \geq 15 $$

$$ x \geq \frac{15}{10} $$

$$ x \geq \frac{3}{2} $$

And this is our domain:

$$ \text{Domain: } x \geq \frac{3}{2} $$

**35.**

$$ f(t) = \frac{10t}{\sqrt{6 - 4t}} $$

Here we have a combination of previous problems. The value of $\sqrt{6 - 4t}$
must not be $0$ and the radicand $6 - 4t$ must not be negative. We can simplify
both of this to a single expression, where the radicand must be greater than
$0$.

$$ 6 - 4t > 0 $$

$$ -4t > -6 $$

$$ t < \frac{6}{4} $$

$$ t < \frac{3}{2} $$

And this is our domain.

$$ \text{Domain: } t < \frac{3}{2} $$

**36.**

$$ f(w) = \frac{\sqrt{w + 7}}{\sqrt{2 - w}}  $$

Here we have a double whammy of sorts. The denominator, like before must not be
zero. We can solve this like before:

$$ 2 - w > 0 $$

$$ 2 > w $$

$$ w < 2 $$

Additionally however, the numerator must return a real number, thusly:

$$ w + 7 \geq 0 $$

$$ w \geq -7 $$

We can now determine our domain based off these two conditions:

$$ \text{Domain}: -7 \leq w < 2 $$

**37.**

$$ A(z) = \sqrt{z^2 - 9z} $$

Here the radicand $z^2 - 9z$ must be greater than or eqaul to $0$:

$$ z^2 - 9z \geq 0 $$

$$ z(z - 9) \geq 0 $$

$$ z \geq 0 $$

$$ z \geq 9 $$

Test cases:

$$ z = -1 $$

$$ (-1)^2 - 9(-1) \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0 $$

$$ 1 + 9 \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0 $$

$$ 10 \geq 0 \text{ TRUE} $$

$$ z = 1 $$

$$ (1)^2 - 9(1) \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0  $$

$$ 1 - 9 \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0 $$

$$ -8 \geq 0 \text{ FALSE} $$

$$ z = 10 $$

$$ (10)^2 - 9(10) \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0  $$

$$ 100 - 90 \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0 $$

$$ 10 \geq 0 \text{ TRUE} $$

Thusly we determine that our values for $z$ must lie inbetween $-\infty$ and
$0$, as well as between $9$ and $\infty$. Thusly our domain can be expressed as:

$$ \text{Domain: } z \leq 0 \text{ or } z \geq 9 $$

It is also possible to express the domain as:

$$ \text{Domain: } (-\infty, 0] \cup [9, \infty) $$

**38.**

$$ h(z) = \sqrt{z^2 - z - 20} $$

Another situation where we must compare polynomial inequalities.

$$ z^2 - z - 20 \geq 0 $$

$$ (z - 5)(z + 4) \geq 0 $$

$$ z \geq -4 $$

$$ z \geq 5 $$

Test Cases:

$$ z = -5 $$

$$ (-5)^2 - (-5) - 20 \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0 $$

$$ 25 + 5 - 20 \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0 $$

$$ 30 - 20 \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0 $$

$$ 10 \geq 0 \text{ TRUE} $$

$$ z = 0 $$

$$ (0)^2 - (0) - 20 \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0 $$

$$ 0 - 0 - 20 \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0 $$

$$ -20 \geq 0 \text{ FALSE} $$

$$ z = 6 $$

$$ (6)^2 - (6) - 20 \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0 $$

$$ 36 - 6 - 20 \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0 $$

$$ 30 - 20 \stackrel{?}{\geq} 0 $$

$$ 10 \geq 0 \text{ TRUE} $$

Similar to our problem before, we can express the domain thusly:

$$ \text{Domain: } z \leq -4 \text{ or } z \geq 5 $$

Alternatively, we can also express our domain in interval notation:

$$ \text{Domain: } (-\infty, -4] \cup [5 ,\infty) $$

**39.**

$$ g(t) = \sqrt{\frac{6 + t}{5t - 10}} $$

Oof, a doozie. Here we go.

$$ g(t) = \frac{\sqrt{6 + t}}{\sqrt{5t - 10}}$$

$$ 5t - 10 > 0 $$

$$ 5t > 10 $$

$$ t > 2 $$

$$ 6 + t \geq 0 $$

$$ t \geq -6 $$

Thusly our two limits are:

$$ t > 2 $$

$$ t \geq -6 $$

And since both conditions point from $2$ to $\infty$, we can express our domain
as:

$$ \text{Domain: } t > 2 $$

Or alternatively as:

$$ \text{Domain: } (2, \infty) $$
