# 2.3 Applications Of Linear Equations

---

**Example 1**

> In a certain Algebra class there is a total of 350 possible points. These
> points come from 5 homework sets that are worth 10 points each and 3 hour
> exams that are worth 100 points each. A student has received homework scores
> of 4, 8, 7, 7, and 9 and the first two exam scores are 78 and 83. Assuming
> that grades are ssigned according to the standard scale and there are no
> weights assigned to any of the grades is it possible for the student to
> receive an A in the class and if so what is the minimum score on the third
> exame that will give an A? What about a B?

$$ \text{POSSIBLE POINTS} = 350 $$

$$ \text{NUMBER OF HOMEWORK SETS} = 5 $$

$$ \text{POINTS PER HOMEWORK SET} = 10 $$

$$ \text{NUMBER OF HOUR EXAMS} = 3 $$

$$ \text{POINTS PER HOUR EXAM} = 100 $$

$$ \text{STUDENT'S HOMEWORK SCORES} = \{4, 8, 7 ,7, 9\}$$

$$ \text{EXAM SCORES} = \{78, 83\} $$

$$ \text{IS IT POSSIBLE FOR A STUDENT TO RECEIVE AN A IN THE CLASS?} =
\text{TRUE/FALSE} $$

$$ \text{IF GETTING AN A IS POSSIBLE, WHAT IS THE MIN SCORE ON THIRD EXAM TO GET
A?} = ? $$

$$ \text{WHAT ABOUT A B?} = ? $$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{4 + 8 + 7 + 7 + 9 + 78 + 83 + x}{350} >= \frac{90}{100} $$

$$ \frac{196 + x}{350} >= \frac{90}{100} $$

**1.**

Is it possible for a student to receive an A in the class?

Let's break this down. The formula for determining the minimum score required to
get an A in the class is:

$$ \frac{196 + x}{350} = \frac{90}{100} $$

Where $196$ represents our total points thus far, $x$ represents the score
needed to get a 90% in our class, and $350$ represents the total possible
points. Let's solve for $x$:

$$ \frac{196 + x}{350} = \frac{90}{100} $$

$$ (350)(\frac{196 + x}{350}) = (\frac{90}{100})350 $$

$$ 196 + x = 315 $$

$$ x = 119 $$

But this exceeds the total possible number of points one can get on a single
test as established in the problem statement (100). Thusly it is not possible to
get an A in the class.

A: No.

**2.**

What about a B?

We can determine the final test score needed to at least get a B in the class
using the same formula, but adjusting the score needed in the formula:

$$ \frac{196 + x}{350} = \frac{80}{100} $$

Once again, let's solve for $x$:

$$ \frac{196 + x}{350} = \frac{80}{100} $$

$$ (350)(\frac{196 + x}{350}) = (\frac{80}{100})(350) $$

$$ 196 + x = 280 $$

$$ x = 84 $$

This is below the possible test score of 100, so this is a possible grade the
student could receive on the test, and thusly 84 would be the bare minimum grade
necessary for the studen to pass the class with a B.

A: Yes, it is possible for the student to get a B in the class. They would need
to score at least an 84% on the last exam to get a 80% in the whole class
(leaving them with a B-).

---

**Example 2**

> We want to build a set of shelves. The width of the set of shelves needs to be
> 4 times th eheight of the set of shelves and the set of shelves must have
> three shelves in it. If there are 72 feet of wood to use to build the set of
> shelves what should the dimension fo the set of shelves be?

$$ \text{HEIGHT} = \text{HEIGHT} $$

$$ \text{WIDTH} = 4 \cdot \text{HEIGHT} $$

$$ \text{REQUIRED NUMBER OF SHELVES} = 3 $$

$$ \text{AMOUNT OF WOOD TO BUILD SHELVES} = 72\text{ft.} $$

We know that a shelf, being a rectanglular object with 4 vertical pieces, and do
to the constraints of the problem statement, requires 2 horizontal pieces(2
pieces to create 3 shelves). We can also assume that we are using up all
$72\text{ft.}$ of the wood. Thusly our problem can be expressed by the following
equation:

$$ 4(4x) + 2(x) = 72 $$

$$ 16x + 2x = 72 $$

$$ 18x = 72 $$

$$ x = 4 $$

This gives us the height of the shelves, but we also need to giev the dimensions
as per the problem statment, since our height is $4$, and we know width is $4
\cdot \text{HEIGHT}$, then we can easily determine our width is $16$.

So our final dimensions we will need are $4x16 \text{ft.}$

---

**Example 3**

> A calculator has been marked up 15% and is being sold for $78.50. How much did
> the store pay the manufacturer of the calculator?

$$ 1.15x = 78.50 $$

Where $x$ represents the cost paid by the store prior to the 15% markup.

$$ 1.15x = 78.50 $$

$$ \frac{1.15x}{1.15} = \frac{78.50}{1.15} $$

$$ x = 68.26 $$

So the store paid $68.26 to the manufacturer.

---

**Example 4**

> A shirt is on sale for $15.00 and has been marked down 35%. How much was the
> shirt being sold for before the sale?

This means that the shirt is currently selling for 65% of its original price.
Because of this, we can use the following formula to determine the original
price of the shirt:

$$ 0.65x = 15 $$

Where $x$ represents the original price of the shirt.

$$ \frac{0.65x}{0.65} = \frac{15}{0.65} $$

$$ x = 23.08 $$

Thusly the original price of the shirt was $23.08.

---

$$ \text{Distance} = \text{Rate} \times \text{Time} $$

**Example 5**

> Two cars are 500 miles apart and moving directly towards each other. One car
> is moving at a speed of 100 mph and the other is moving at 70 mph. Assuming
> that the cars start m oving at the same time how long does it take for the two
> cars to meet?

Every hour each car moves their respective distances towards each other (100mph
for car A, 70mph for car B), closing the 500 mile gap. We want to grab the total
hours when the total gap of 500 is traversed. This can be expressed as:

$$ (\text{DISTANCE OF CAR A}) + (\text{DISTANCE OF CAR B}) = 500 $$

Or also as:

$$ (\text{RATE OF CAR A})(\text{TIME OF CAR A}) + (\text{RATE OF CAR B})(\text{TIME OF CAR B}) = 500 $$

Since we know the Rate for both cars, we simply have to create a variable for
the total time, $t$ and find it using the above formula:

$$ 100t + 70t = 500 $$

$$ 170t = 500 $$

$$ \frac{170t}{170} = \frac{500}{170} $$

$$ t = 2.941176 \text{hours} $$

Thusly, both cars will travel about $2.94$ hours before meeting.

---

**Example 6**

> Repeat the previous example except this time assume that the faster car will
> start 1 hour after the slower car starts.

This is simple. we simply adjust the $t$ variable for Car A by subtracting 1
from it like so:

$$ 100(t - 1) + 70t = 500 $$

$$ 100t - 100 + 70t = 500 $$

$$ 100t + 70t = 600 $$

$$ 170t = 600 $$

$$ \frac{170t}{170} = \frac{600}{170} $$

$$ t = 3.529411 \text{hours} $$

Thusly, the faster car wil travel about $3.53$ hours before meeting. Whilst the
slower car wil ltravel $2.53$ hours before meeting (1 hour less since it started
1 hour earlier).

---

**Example 7**

> Two boats start out 100 miles apart and start moving to the right at the same
> time. The boat on the left is moving at twice the speed as the boat on the
> right. Five hours after starting the boat on the left catches up with the boat
> on the right. How fast was each boat moving?

$$ \text{RIGHT BOAT SPEED} = r $$

$$ \text{LEFT BOAT SPEED} = 2r $$

We can find the speed of each boat by taking the total hours when they meet, $5$
and multiplying it by each respective rate. Since the right most boat is $100$
miles ahead, we can also add that to the side of the equation representing the
right most boat. By solving for the rate, we can determine the speed of each
boat:

$$ 100 + (r)(5) = (2r)(5) $$

$$ 100 + 5r = 10r $$

$$ 100 = 5r $$

$$ \frac{100}{5} = \frac{5r}{5} $$

$$ 20 = r $$

Thusly the speed of our RIGHT BOAT is $20 \text{mph}$, and the speed of our LEFT
BOAT is $40 \text{mph}$.

---

$$ (\text{Portion of job done in given time}) = (\text{Work Rate}) \times
(\text{Time Spent Working}) $$

**Example 8**

> An office has two envelope stuffing machines. Machine A can stuff a batch of
> envelopes in 5 hours, while Machine B can stuff a batch of envelopes in 3
> hours. How long would it take the two machines working together to stuff a
> batch of envelopes?

In a single hour, Machine A can get $\frac{1}{5}$ of a batch done. In a single
hour, Machine B can get $\frac{1}{3}$ of a batch done.

Machine A's work can be represented as such:

$$ 1\text{BATCH} = (\frac{1}{5}\text{BATCH PER HOUR}) \times (5\text{HOURS})$$

Similarly, Machine B's work can be represented as such:

$$ 1\text{BATCH} = (\frac{1}{3}\text{BATCH PER HOUR}) \times (3\text{HOURS})$$

We are now combining their two formulas together, but solving for the total
amount of HOURS, $h$:

$$ 1 = (\frac{1}{3} + \frac{1}{5}) \times h $$

$$ 1 = \frac{8}{15}h $$

$$ 15 = 8h $$

$$ \frac{15}{8} = h $$

$$ 1.875 = h $$

Thusly it would take both machines $1.875\text{hours}$ to stuff a single batch
of envelopes.

---

**Example 9**

> Mary can clean an office complex in 5 hours. Working together John and Mary
> can clean the office complex in 3.5 hours. How lng would it take John to clean
> the office complex by himself?

This is similar to the previous problem, but we are trying to parse out how long
it will take a single entity to do the job.

$$ 1 = (\frac{1}{5} + \frac{1}{x}) \ times 3.5 $$

$$ 1 = 3.5(\frac{1}{5} + \frac{1}{x}) $$

$$ 1 = 0.7 + \frac{3.5}{x} $$

$$ 0.3 = \frac{3.5}{x} $$

$$ 0.3x = 3.5 $$

$$ x \approx 11.67 $$

It will take John about 11.67 hours to clean the complex by himself.

---

$$ (\text{Amount of secondary liquid in the water}) = (\text{Percentage of Solution}) \times (\text{Volume of Solution}) $$

** Example 10**

> How much of a 50% alcohol solution should we mix with 10 gallons of a 35%
> solution to get a 40% solution?

$$ (\text{Amount of alcohol in 50\% solution}) + (\text{Amount of alcohol in 35\% solution}) = (\text{Amount of alcohol in 40\% solution})$$

$$ (0.5)(\text{Volume of 50\% Solution}) + (0.35)(\text{Volume of 35\% Solution}) = (0.4)(\text{Volume of 40\% Solution}) $$

$$ 0.5x + 0.35(10) = 0.4(x + 10) $$

$$ 0.5x + 3.5 = 0.4x + 4 $$

$$ 0.1x = 0.5 $$

$$ x = \frac{0.5}{0.1} = 5\text{ gallons} $$

Thusly, we need 5 gallons of the 50% solution to get a 40% solution.

---

**Example 11**

> We have a 40% acid solution and we want 75 liters of a 15% acid solution. How
> much water should we put into the 40% solution to do this?

$$ 0(x) + 0.4(75 - x) = 0.15(75) $$

$$ 30 - 0.4x = 11.25 $$

$$ 18.75 = 0.4x $$

$$ x = \frac{18.75}{0.4} = 46.875\text{ liters} $$

Thusly we need to add 46.875 liters of water to 28.125 liters of a 40% solution
to get 75 liters of a 15% solution.

---

## Practice Problems

**1.**

> A widget is being sold in a store for $135.40 and has been marked up 7%. How
> much did the store pay for the widget?

$\$135.40$ is the price of $1.07$ times the original price. Thusly:

$$ 1.07x = 135.40 $$

Where $x$ represents the original price. Solving for $x$ gives us the original
price:

$$ 1.07x = 135.40 $$

$$ \frac{1.07x}{1.07} = \frac{135.40}{1.07} $$

$$ x \approx 126.542 $$

Thusly the original price of our widget is $\$126.54$.

**2.**

> A store is having a 30% off sale and one item is now being sold for $9.95.
> What was the original price of the item?

The price $\$9.95$ is $0.70$ times the original price of the time. Thusly we can
represent the original price like so:

$$ 0.7x = 9.95 $$

Where $x$ represents the original price of the item. Solving for $x$ will give
us the original price.

$$ 0.7x = 9.95 $$

$$ \frac{0.7x}{0.7} = \frac{9.95}{0.7} $$

$$ x \approx 14.214 $$

Thusly our original price is $\$14.21$.

**3.**

> Two planes start out 2800 km apart and move towards each other meeting after
> 3.5 hours. One plane flies at 75 km/hour slower than the other plane. What was
> the speed of each plane?

This can be determined by the following formula:

$$ (\text{Rate of Plane A})(\text{Time of Plane A}) + (\text{Rate of Plane B})(\text{Time of Plane B}) = 2800 $$

Let $r$ be the rate of Plane B, and let $r - 75$ be the rate of Plane A (the
plane that is traveling $75 \text{km/hour}$ slower than the other).

When each is multiplied by the amount of time it took for the two planes to
meet, $3.5 \text{hours}$, we get the following formula:

$$ (r - 75)(3.5) + (r)(3.5) = 2800 $$

$$ 3.5r - 262.5 + 3.5r = 2800 $$

$$ 7r = 2800 + 262.5 $$

$$ 7r = 3062.5 $$

$$ \frac{7r} = \frac{3062.5}{7} $$

$$ r = 437.5\text{ km/hour} $$

**4.**

> Mike starts out 35 feet in front of Kim and they both start moving towards the
> right at the same time. Mike moves at 2 ft/sec while Kim moves at 3.4 ft/sec.
> How long will it take for Kim to catch up with Mike?

This can be represented by the following formula:

$$ 35 + (\text{Rate of Mike})(\text{Time of Mike}) = (\text{Rate of Kim})(\text{Time of Kim}) $$

We can represent this as:

$$ 35 + 2t = 3.4t $$

Where $t$ represents the time it will take for Kim to catch up to Mike. Let's
solve for $t$.

$$ 35 + 2t = 3.4t $$

$$ 35 = 1.4t $$

$$ \frac{35}{1.4} = \frac{1.4t}{1.4} $$

$$ 25\text{ sec} = t $$

**5.**

> A pump can empty a pool in 7 hours and a different pump can empty the same
> pool in 12 hours. How long does it take for both pumps working together to
> empty the pool?

Let's first just consider the formula for how long it takes for one of these
pumps to finish the job:

$$ (\text{Work Rate of pump})(\text{Work Time of pump}) = 1 $$

If we extrapolate this, we can determine the work rate of each pump as being:

$$ (\text{Work Rate of first pump})(7) = 1 \Rightarrow \text{Work Rate of first pump} = \frac{1}{7} $$

$$ (\text{Work Rate of second pump})(12) = 1 \Rightarrow \text{Work Rate of second pump} = \frac{1}{12} $$

Adding up to a single job (i.e. draining the pool), we can add these two rates
together, multiplying each by the total time $t$ and determine how long it will
take for both pumps working at the same time to drain the pool

$$ (\frac{1}{7} + \frac{1}{12})(t) = 1 $$

$$ (\frac{1}{7})(t) + (\frac{1}{12})(t) = 1 $$

$$ \frac{19}{84}(t) = 1 $$

$$ (84)(\frac{19}{84}(t)) = (1)(84) $$

$$ 19t = 84 $$

$$ \frac{19t}{19} = \frac{84}{19} $$

$$ t \approx 4.4211\text{ hours}  $$

**6.**

> John can paint a house in 28 hours. John and Dave can paint the house in 17
> hours working together. How long would it take Dave to paint the house by
> himself?

This can be represented by the following formula:

$$ (\text{Portion of job done by John}) + (\text{Portion of job done by Dave}) = 1\text{ Job} $$

$$ (\text{Work Rate of John})(\text{Time Spent Working}) + (\text{Work Rate of Dave})(\text{Time Spent Working}) = 1 $$

$$ 1\text{ Job} = (\text{Work Rate of John}) \times (28) \Rightarrow \text{Work
    Rate of John} = \frac{1}{28} $$

Since we don't know the rate at which Dave works, we can represent that as the
variable $t$.

$$ 1\text{ Job} = (\text{Work Rate of Dave}) \times (t) \Rightarrow \text{Work
    Rate of Dave} = \frac{1}{t} $$

Plugging these numbers into our original formula yields this:

$$ \frac{1}{28}(17) + \frac{1}{t}(17) = 1 $$

Solving for $t$ gives us the amount of hours it takes Dave to paint a house by
himself.

$$ \frac{1}{28}(17) + \frac{1}{t}(17) = 1 $$

$$ \frac{17}{28} + \frac{17}{t} = 1 $$

$$ \frac{17}{t} = 1 - \frac{17}{28} $$

$$ \frac{17}{t} = \frac{11}{28} $$

$$ 17 = \frac{11}{28}t $$

$$ (28)(17) = (\frac{11}{28}t)(28) $$

$$ 476 = 11t $$

$$ \frac{476}{11} = \frac{11t}{11} $$

$$ 43.272\text{ hours} \approx t $$

Thusly it takes Dave $43.272\text{ hours}$ to paint a house.

**7.**

> How much of a 20% acid solution should we add to 20 gallons of a 42% acid
> solution to get a 35% acid solution?

This can be represented by the following formula:

$$ (\text{Percentage Of Solution})(\text{Volume of Percentage Solution}) + \\ (\text{Percentage Of Solution})(\text{Volume of Percentage Solution})\\ = (\text{Percentage Of Solution})(\text{Volume of Percentage Solution}) $$

More specifically to our problem statement, it would look like this:

$$ (0.2)(x) + (0.42)(20) = (0.35)(x + 20) $$

Where $x$ represents the amount of 20% solution to add to the 42% solution to
get the 35% solution. (And $x + 20$ represents the total volume of the 35%
solution we'll have at the end).

$$ 0.2x + 0.42(20) = 0.35(x + 20) $$

$$ 0.2x + 8.4 = 0.35x + 7 $$

$$ 1.4 = 0.15x $$

$$ \frac{1.4}{0.15} = \frac{0.15x}{0.15} $$

$$ 9.333\text{ gallons} \approx x $$

Thusly we should add $9.33\text{ gallons}$ of 20% acid solution to 20 gallons of
42% acid solution to get 35% acid solution.

**8.**

> We need 100 liters of a 25% saline solution and we only have a 14% solution
> and a 60% solution. How much of each should we mix together to get the 100
> liters of the 25% solution?

Let $x$ be how much of 14% solution we mix together to get 100 liters of the 25%
solution. And $100 - x$ be how much of the 60% solution we need to get 100
liters of the 25% solution.

$$ 0.14(x) + 0.6(100 - x) = 0.25(100) $$

This is similar to the above problem, with the difference being that we are
limited in the amount of solution we have to use.

$$ 0.14x + 0.6(100 - x) = 0.25(100) $$

$$ 0.14x + 0.6(100) - 0.6x = 0.25(100) $$

$$ 60 - 0.46x = 25 $$

$$ 35 = 0.46x $$

$$ \frac{35}{0.46} = \frac{0.46x}{0.46} $$

$$ 76.09 \approx x $$

Thusly the amount of 14% solution we need is $76.09\text{ liters}$ and the
amount of 60% solution we need is $23.91\text{ liters}$.

**9.**

> We want to fence in a field whose length is twice the width and we have 80
> feet of fencing material. If we use all the fencing material what would the
> dimensions of the field be?

A simple AREA problem:

We have four sides to create a rectangular field and find the
$\text{PERIMETER}$, which is stated in the problem statement as ultimately being
$80$.

$$ 2(\text{LENGTH}) + 2(\text{WIDTH}) = \text{PERIMETER} $$

Let $x$ represent the $\text{WIDTH}$ dimension, and $2x$ represent the
$\text{LENGTH}$ dimension.

$$ 2(2x) + 2(x) = 80 $$

$$ 4x + 2x = 80 $$

$$ 6x = 80 $$

$$ x \approx 13.33 $$

Thusly our field's dimensions would be $13.33\text{ ft.}$ wide and
$26.66\text{ ft.}$ long.

---

## Assignment Problems

**1.**

> In a clearance bin everything has been reduced by 75%. One item is listed in
> the bin for $32.40. How much was the price of the item before it was put into
> the clearance bin?

**2.**

> A piece of electronics has been marked up 20% and is selling for $21.50. How
> much did the store pay for the item?

**3.**

> A widget is on sale for $715.80 and has been marked down by 11%. What was the
> original price of the widget?

**4.**

> A widget is on sale for $715.80 and has been marked down by 11%. What was the
> original price of the widget?

**5.**

> Two people start out 100 meters apart from each other and start moving towards
> each other at the same time. One person is moving at half the speed of the
> other person and they meet after 25 seconds of travel time. What was the speed
> of each person?

**6.**

> Two boats start at the same point. One boat starts traveling to the east at 45
> mph and two hours later the second boat starts traveling to the east at 60
> mph. At some point in time the faster boat will be 145 miles in front of the
> slower boat. How long has each boat been traveling when this happens?

**7.**

> One machine can complete a production run at a factory in 46 hours. Two
> machines can complete the production run in 25 hours if they work together.
> How long would it take the second machine to complete the production run if it
> had to do the job by itself?

**8.**

> One person can mow a field in 52 minutes and a second can mow the same field
> in 40 minutes. How long would it take the two of them to mow the field
> together?

**9.**

> One pump can fill a pool in 11 hours and a second pump can empty the same pool
> in 4 hours. While the pool is full both pumps are accidentally both turned on
> at the same time. How long will does it take to empty the pool?

**10.**

> How much pure acid should we add to a 32% acid solution to get 10 liters of a
> 60% acid solution.

**11.**

> We have 80 liters of a 2% saline solution. How much of a 10% saline solution
> should we add to this to increase the salinity to 4%?

**12.**

> We have 80 liters of a 2% saline solution. How much of a 10% saline solution
> should we add to this to increase the salinity to 4%?

**13.**

> There is a field whose width is 6 meters less than its length. If both the
> length and width are doubled the perimeter will be 120 meters. What are the
> dimensions of the field?

**14.**

> There is a field whose width is 6 meters less than its length. If both the
> length and width are doubled the perimeter will be 120 meters. What are the
> dimensions of the field?
