# Section 5.1 : Indefinite Integrals

In the past two chapters we've been given a function, $f(x)$, and asking what
the derivative of this function was. Starting with this section we are going to
turn things around. We now want to ask what function we differentiated to get
the function $f(x)$.

Let's take a quick look at an example to get us started.

---

**Example 1** What function did we differentiate to get the following function.

$$ f(x) = x^4 + 3x - 9 $$

**Solution**

Let's actually start by getting the derivative of this function to help us see
how we're going to have to approach this problem. The derivative of this
function is,

$$ f'(x) = 4x^3 + 3 $$

The point of this was to remind us of how differentiation works. When
differentiating powers of $x$ we multiply the term by the original exponent and
then drop the exponent by one.

Now, let's go back and work the problem. In fact, let's just start with the
first term. We got $x^4$ by differentiating a function and since we drop the
exponent by one it looks like we must have differentiated $x^5$. However, if we
had differentiated $x^5$ we would have $5x^4$ and we don't have a 5 in front of
our first term, so the 5 needs to cancel out after we've differentiated. It
looks then like we would have to differentiate $\dfrac{1}{5}x^5$ in order to get
$x^4$.

Likewise, for the second term, in order to get 3x after differentiating we would
have to differentiate $\dfrac{3}{2}x^2$. Again, the fraction is there to cancel
out the 2 we pick up in the differentiation.

The third term is just a constant and we know that if we diffferentiate $x$ we
get 1. So, it looks like we had to differentiate $-9x$ to get the last term.

Putting all of this together gives the following function,

$$ F(x) = \frac{1}{5}x^5 + \frac{3}{2}x^2 - 9x $$

Our answer is easy enough to check. Simply differentiate $F(x)$.

$$ F'(x) = x^4 + 3x - 9 = f(x) $$

So, it looks like we got the correct function. Or did we? We know that the
derivative of a constant is zero and so any of the following will also give
$f(x)$ upon differentiating.

$$ F(x) = \frac{1}{5}x^5 + \frac{3}{2}x^2 - 9x + 10 $$

$$ F(x) =\frac{1}{5}x^5 + \frac{3}{2}x^2 - 9x - 1954  $$

$$ F(x) = \frac{1}{5}x^5 + \frac{3}{2}x^2 - 9x + \frac{3469}{123} $$

$$ \text{etc.} $$

In fact, any function of the form,

$$ F(x) = \frac{1}{5}x^5 + \frac{3}{2}x^2 - 9x + c \text{,} \quad \quad c \text{ is a constant} $$

will give $f(x)$ upon differentiating.

---

There were two points to this last example. The first point was to get you
thinking about how to do these problems. It is important initially to remember
that we are really just asking what we differentiated to get the given function.

The other point is to recognize that there are actually an infinite number of
functions that we could use and they will all differ by a constant.

Now that we've worked an example let's get some of the definitions and
terminology out of the way.

**Definitions**

> Given a function, $f(x)$, an **anti-derivative** of $f(x)$ is any function
> $F(x)$ such that
>
> $$ F'(x) = f(x) $$
>
> If $F(x)$ is any anti-derivative of $f(x)$ then the most general
> anti-derivative of $f(x)$ is called an **indefinite integral** and denoted,
>
> $$ \int{f(x) dx} = F(x) + c \text{, } \quad \quad c \text{ is an arbitrary constant} $$
>
> In this definition the $\int$ is called the **integral symbol**, $f(x)$ is
> called the **integrand**, $x$ is called the **integration variable** and the
> "c" is called the **constant of integration**.

Note that often we will just say integral instead of indefinite integral (or
definite integral for that matter when we get to those). It will be clear from
the context of the problem that we are talking about an indefinite integral (or
definite integral).

The process of finding the indefinite integral is called **integration** or
**integrating** $f(x)$. If we need to be specific about the integration variable
we will say that we are **integrating** $f(x)$ **with respect to** $x$.

Let's rework the first problem in light of the new terminology.

---

**Example 2** Evaluate the following indefinite integral.

$$ \int{x^4 + 3x - 9\, dx} $$

**Solution**

Since this is really asking for the most general anti-derivative we just need to
reuse the final answer from the first example.

The indefinite integral is,

$$ \int{x^4 + 3x - 9\, dx} =\frac{1}{5}x^5 + \frac{3}{2}x^2 - 9x + c  $$

---

A couple of warnings are now in order. One of the more common mistakes that
students make with integrals (both indefinite and definite) is to drop the _dx_
at the end of the integral. This is required! Think of the integral sign and the
_dx_ as a set of parentheses. You already know and are probably quite
comfortable with the idea that every time you open a parenthesis you must close
it. With integrals, think of the integral sign as an "open parenthesis" and the
dx as a "close parenthesis".

If you drop the _dx_ it won't be clear where the integrand ends. Consider the
following variations of the above example.

$$ \int{x^4 + 3x - 9\, dx} = \frac{1}{5}x^5 + \frac{3}{2}x^2 - 9x + c $$

$$ \int{x^4 + 3x\, dx - 9} = \frac{1}{5}x^5 + \frac{3}{2}x^2 + c - 9 $$

$$ \int{x^4\, dx + 3x - 9} = \frac{1}{5}x^5  + c + 3x - 9 $$

You only integrate what is between the integral sign and the _dx_. Each of the
above integrals end in a different place and so we get different answers because
we integrate a different number of terms each time. In the second integral the
"-9" is outside the integral and so is left alone and not integrated. Likewise,
in the third integral the "$3x - 9$" is outside the integral and so is left
alone.

Knowing which terms to integrate is not the only reason for writing the $dx$
down. In the
[**Substitution Rule**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/SubstitutionRuleIndefinite.aspx)
section we will actually be working with the $dx$ in the problem and if we
aren't in the habit of writing it down it will be easy to forget about it and
then we will get the wrong answer at that stage.

The moral of this is to make sure and put in the $dx$! At this stage it may seem
like a silly thing to do, but it just needs to be there, if for no other reason
than knowing where the integral stops.

On a side note, the $dx$ notation should seem a little familiar to you. We saw
things like this a couple of sections ago. We called the $dx$ a
[**differential**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/Differentials.aspx)
in that section and yes that is exactly what it is. The $dx$ that ends the
integral is nothing more than a differential.

The next topic that we should discuss here is the integration variable used in
the integral. Actually, there isn't really a lot to discuss here other than to
note that the integration variable doesn't really matter. For instance,

$$ \int{x^4 + 3x - 9\, dx} = \frac{1}{5}x^5 + \frac{3}{2}x^2 - 9x + c $$

$$ \int{t^4 + 3t - 9\, dt} = \frac{1}{5}t^5 + \frac{3}{2}t^2 - 9t + c $$

$$ \int{w^4 + 3w - 9\, dw} = \frac{1}{5}w^5 + \frac{3}{2}w^2 - 9w + c $$

Changing the integration variable in the integral simply changes the variable in
the answer. It is important to notice however that when we change the
integration variable in the integral we also changed the differential ($dx$,
$dt$, or $dw$) to match the new variable. This is more important than we might
realize at this point.

Another use of the differential at the end of integral is to tell us what
variable we are integrating with respect to. At this stage that may seem
unimportant since most of the integrals that we're going to be working with here
will only involve a single variable. However, if you are on a degree track that
will take you into multi-variable calculus this will be very important at that
stage since there will be more than one variable in the problem. You need to get
into the habit of writing the correct differential at the end of the integral so
when it becomes important in those classes you will already be in the habit of
writing it down.

To see why this is important take a look at the following two integrals.

$$ \int{2x\, dx} \quad \quad \quad \quad \int{2t\, dx} $$

The first integral is simple enough.

$$ \int{2x\, dx} = x^2 + c $$

The second integral is also fairly simple, but we need to be careful. The _dx_
tells us that we are integrating $x$'s. That means that we only integrate $x$'s
that are in the integrand and all other variables in the integrand are
considered to be constants. The second integral is then,

$$ \int{2t\, dx} = 2tx + c $$

So, it may seem silly to always put in the _dx_, but it is a vital bit of
notation that can cause us to get the incorrect answer if we neglect to put it
in.

Now, there are some important properties of integrals that we should take a look
at.

**Properties of the Indefinite Integral**

> 1. $\displaystyle \int{kf(x)\, dx} = k\int{f(x)\, dx}$ where $k$ is any
>    number. So, we can factor multiplicative constants out of indefinite
>    integrals. See the
>    [**Proof of Various Integral Formulas**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/ProofIntProp.aspx#Extras_IntPf_Indef1)
>    section of the Extras chapter to see the proof of this property.
> 2. $\displaystyle \int{-f(x)\, dx} = -\int{f(x)\, dx}$. This is really the
>    first property with $k = -1$ and so no proof of this property will be
>    given.
> 3. $\displaystyle \int{f(x) \pm g(x)\, dx} = \int{f(x)\, dx} \pm \int{g(x)\, dx}$.
>    In other words, the integral of a sum or difference of functions is the sum
>    or difference of the individual integrals. This rule can be extended to as
>    many functions as we need. See the
>    [**Proof of Various Integral Formulas**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/ProofIntProp.aspx#Extras_IntPf_Indef2)
>    section of the Extras chapter to see the proof of this property.

Notice that when we worked the first example above we used the first and third
property in the discussion. We integrated each term individually, put any
constants back in and then put everything back together with the appropriate
sign.

Not listed in the properties above were integrals of products and quotients. The
reason for this is simple. Just like with derivatives each of the following will
NOT work.

$$ \int{f(x)g(x)\, dx} \neq \int{f(x)\, dx}\int{g(x)\, dx} \quad \quad \quad \int{\frac{f(x)}{g(x)}\, dx} \neq \frac{\int{f(x)\, dx}}{\int{g(x)\, dx}} $$

With derivatives we had a product rule and a quotient rule to deal with these
cases. However, with integrals there are no such rules. When faced with a
product and quotient in an integral we will have a variety of ways of dealing
with it depending on just what the integrand is.

There is one final topic to be discussed briefly in this section. On occasion we
will be given $f'(x)$ and will ask what $f(x)$ was. We can now answer this
question easily with an indefinite integral.

$$ f(x) = \int{f'(x)\, dx} $$

---

**Example 3** If $f'(x) = x^4 + 3x - 9$ what was $f(x)$?

**Solution**

By this point in this section this is a simple question to answer.

$$ f(x) = \int{f'(x)\, dx} = \int{x^4 + 3x - 9\, dx} = \frac{1}{5}x^5 + \frac{3}{2}x^2 - 9x + c $$

---

In this section we kept evaluating the same indefinite integral in all of our
examples. The point of this section was not to do indefinite integrals, but
instead to get us familiar with the notation and some of the basic ideas and
properties of indefinite integrals. The next couple of sections are devoted to
actually evaluating indefinite integrals.

---

## Practice Problems

**1.** Evaluate each of the following integrals

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{6x^5 - 18x^2 + 7\, dx}$

**Solution**

Let's slow at first, recall that what an integral is doing is essentially "going
back up" the derivative chain (in very basic terms). This means that our
expression is:

$$ f'(x) = 6x^5 - 18x^2 + 7 $$

Now just find $f(x)$:

$$ f(x) = x^6 - \frac{18}{3}x^3 + 7x $$

$$ f(x) = x^6 - 6x^3 + 7x $$

And that's our answer, just add some constant, $c$:

$$ \boxed{\int{6x^5 - 18x^2 + 7\, dx} = x^6 - 6x^3 + 7x + c} $$

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{6x^5\, dx - 18x^2 + 7}$

**Solution**

Recall that anything after the _dx_ is not evaluated as being part of the
differential.

$$ \boxed{\int{6x^5\, dx - 18x^2 + 7} = x^6 + c - 18x^2 + 7} $$

**2.** Evaluate each of the following integrals

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{40x^3 + 12x^2 - 9x + 14\, dx}$

**Solution**

A bit faster now:

$$ \boxed{\displaystyle \int{40x^3 + 12x^2 - 9x + 14\, dx} = 10x^4 + 4x^3 - \frac{9}{2}x^2 + 14x + c} $$

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{40x^3 + 12x^2 - 9x\, dx + 14}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\displaystyle \int{40x^3 + 12x^2 - 9x\, dx + 14} = 10x^4 + 4x^3 - \frac{9}{2}x^2 + c + 14} $$

**\(c\)** $\displaystyle \int{40x^3 + 12x^2\, dx - 9x + 14}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\displaystyle \int{40x^3 + 12x^2\, dx - 9x + 14} = 10x^4 + 4x^3 + c - 9x + 14} $$

For problems 3 - 5 evaluate the indefinite integral.

**3.** $\displaystyle \int{12t^7 - t^2 - t + 3\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{12t^7 - t^2 - t + 3\, dt} = \frac{3}{2}t^8 - \frac{1}{3}t^3 - \frac{1}{2}t^2 + 3t + c} $$

**4.** $\displaystyle \int{10w^4 + 9w^3 + 7w\, dw}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{10w^4 + 9w^3 + 7w\, dw} = 2w^5 + \frac{9}{4}w^4 + \frac{7}{2}w^2 + c} $$

**5.** $\displaystyle \int{z^6 + 4z^4 - z^2\, dz}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{z^6 + 4z^4 - z^2\, dz} = \frac{1}{7}z^7 + \frac{4}{5}z^5 - \frac{1}{3}z^3 + c} $$

**6.** Determine $f(x)$ given that $f'(x) = 6x^8 - 20x^4 + x^2 + 9$.

**Solution**

This is just different wording for finding the integral.

$$ \int{f'(x)\, dx} = f(x) $$

$$ \boxed{\int{6x^8 - 20x^4 + x^2 + 9\, dx} = \frac{2}{3}x^9 - 4x^5 + \frac{1}{3}x^3 + 9x + c} $$

**7.** Determine $h(t)$ given that $h'(t) = t^4 - t^3 + t^2 + t - 1$.

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{t^4 - t^3 + t^2 + t - 1\, dt} = \frac{1}{5}t^5 - \frac{1}{4}t^4 + \frac{1}{3}t^3 + \frac{1}{2}t^2 - t + c} $$

---

## Assignment Problems

**1.** Evaluate each of the following indefinite integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{10x^9 - 12x^3 - 5\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{10x^9 - 12x^3 - 5\, dx} = x^{10} - 3x^4 - 5x + c} $$

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{10x^9 - 12x^3\, dx - 5}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{10x^9 - 12x^3\, dx - 5} = x^{10} - 3x^4 + c - 5} $$

**2.** Evaluate each of the following indefinite integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{t^7 + 33t^2 + 8t\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{t^7 + 33t^2 + 8t\, dt} = \frac{1}{8}t^8 + 11t^3 + 4t^2 + c} $$

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{t^7\, dt + 33t^2 + 8t}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\displaystyle \int{t^7\, dt + 33t^2 + 8t} = \frac{1}{8}t^8 + c + 33t^2 + 8t} $$

**3.** Evaluate each of the following indefinite integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{6x^5 - 7x^3 + 12x^2 - 10\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{6x^5 - 7x^3 + 12x^2 - 10\, dx} = x^6 - \frac{7}{4}x^4 + 4x^3 - 10x + c} $$

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{6x^5 - 7x^3 + 12x^2\, dx - 10}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{6x^5 - 7x^3 + 12x^2\, dx - 10} = x^6 - \frac{7}{4}x^4 + 4x^3 + c - 10} $$

**\(c\)** $\displaystyle \int{6x^5\, dx -7x^3 + 12x^2 - 10}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{6x^5\, dx -7x^3 + 12x^2 - 10} = x^6 + c - 7x^3 + 12x^2 - 10} $$

**4.** Evaluate each of the following indefinite integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{21x^6 - 9x^5 - x^3 - x\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{21x^6 - 9x^5 - x^3 - x\, dx} = 3x^7 - \frac{3}{2}x^6 - \frac{1}{4}x^4 -\frac{1}{2}x^2 + c} $$

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{21x^6 - 9x^5 - x^3\, dx - x}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{21x^6 - 9x^5 - x^3\, dx - x} = 3x^7 - \frac{3}{2}x^6 - \frac{1}{4}x^4 + c - x} $$

**\(c\)** $\displaystyle \int{21x^6 - 9x^5\, dx - x^3 - x}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{21x^6 - 9x^5\, dx - x^3 - x} = 3x^7 - \frac{3}{2}x^6 + c - x^3 - x} $$

For problems 5 - 9 evaluate the indefinite integral.

**5.** $\displaystyle \int{8t^5 - 15t^2 - 1\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{8t^5 - 15t^2 - 1\, dt} = \frac{4}{3}t^6 - 5t^3 - t + c} $$

**6.** $\displaystyle \int{120y^9 - 24y^5 - 4y^3\, dy}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{120y^9 - 24y^5 - 4y^3\, dy} = 12y^{10} - 4y^6 - y^4 + c} $$

**7.** $\displaystyle \int{\, dw}$

**Solution**

A brief explanation might be necessary here, we are not given any function here,
but are asked to find the antiderivative of _any function_ with respects to $w$.
This means that we have at least one variable $w$ and a constant:

$$ \boxed{\int{\, dw} = w + c} $$

**8.** $\displaystyle \int{x^9 + 14x^6 - 10x^3 + 13x\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{x^9 + 14x^6 - 10x^3 + 13x\, dx} = \frac{1}{10}x^{10} + 2x^7 - \frac{5}{2}x^4 + \frac{13}{2}x^2 + c} $$

**9.** $\displaystyle \int{8x^6 - x^4 - 7x^2 + 11x - 12\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{8x^6 - x^4 - 7x^2 + 11x - 12\, dx} = \frac{8}{7}x^7 - \frac{1}{5}x^5 - \frac{7}{3}x^3 + \frac{11}{2}x^2 - 12x + c} $$

**10.** Determine $f(x)$ given that $f'(x) = 16x^4 - 9x^2 - x$.

**Solution**

Just a rewording, no problem.

$$ \int{f'(x)\, dx} = f(x) $$

$$ \boxed{\int{16x^4 - 9x^2 - x\, dx} = \frac{16}{5}x^5 - 3x^3 - \frac{1}{2}x^2 + c} $$

**11.** Determine $g(t)$ given that $g'(t) = 4t^5 + 16t^2 - 18t + 72$.

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{4t^5 + 16t^2 - 18t + 72\, dt} = \frac{2}{3}t^6 + \frac{16}{3}t^3 - 9t^2 + 72t + c} $$

**12.** Determine $R(z)$ given that
$R'(z) = 4z^{15} + 121z^{10} + 20z^5 + z - 4$.

**Solution**

$$ \boxed{\int{4z^{15} + 121z^{10} + 20z^5 + z - 4\, dz} = \frac{1}{4}z^{16} + 11z^{11} + \frac{10}{3}z^6 + \frac{1}{2}z^2 - 4z + c} $$

**13.** Determine $f(x)$ given that $f''(x) = 8x^3 - 12x + 3$.

**Solution**

Interesting, let's first try and find the first integral:

$$ \int{f''(x)\, dx} = f'(x) $$

$$ \int{8x^3 - 12x + 3\, dx} = 2x^4 - 6x^2 + 3x + c $$

Now find:

$$ \int{f'(x)\, dx} = f(x) $$

$$ \boxed{\int{2x^4 - 6x^2 + 3x + c\, dx} = \frac{2}{5}x^5 - 2x^3 + \frac{3}{2}x^2 + cx + d} $$
