# Section 5.3 : Substitution Rule For Indefinite Integrals

After the last section we now know how to do the following integrals.

$$ \int{\sqrt[4]{x}\, dx} \quad \quad \int{\frac{1}{t^3}\, dt} \quad \quad \int{\cos w\, dw} \quad \quad \int{\mathbf{e}^y\, dy} $$

All of the integrals we've done to this point have required that we just had an
$x$, or a $t$, or a $w$, _etc._ and not more complicated terms such as,

$$ \int{18x^2\sqrt[4]{6x^3 + 5}\, dx} \quad \quad \int{\frac{2t^3 + 1}{\left(t^4 + 2t\right)^3}\, dt} $$

$$ \int{\left(1 - \frac{1}{2}\right)\cos\left(w - \ln w\right)\, dw} \quad \quad \int{(8y - 1)\mathbf{e}^{4y^2 - y}\, dy} $$

All of these look considerably more difficult than the first set. However, they
aren't too bad once you see how to do them. Let’s start with the first one.

$$ \int{18x^2\sqrt[4]{6x^3 + 5}\, dx} $$

In this case let's notice that if we let

$$ u = 6x^3 + 5 $$

and we compute the
[**differential**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/Differentials.aspx)
(you remember how to compute these right?) for this we get,

$$ du = 18x^2 dx $$

Now, let's go back to our integral and notice that we can eliminate every $x$
that exists in the integral and write the integral completely in terms of $u$
using both the definition of $u$ and its differential.

$$ \int{18x^2\sqrt[4]{6x^3 + 5}\, dx} = \int{\left(6x^3 + 5\right)^{\frac{1}{4}}\left(18x^2 dx\right)} $$

$$ \quad = \int{u^{\frac{1}{4}}\, du} $$

In the process of doing this we've taken an integral that looked very difficult
and with a quick substitution we were able to rewrite the integral into a very
simple integral that we can do.

Evaluating the integral gives,

$$ \int{18x^2\sqrt[4]{6x^3 + 5}\, dx} = \int{u^{\frac{1}{4}}\, du} = \frac{4}{5}u^{\frac{5}{4}} + c = \frac{4}{5}\left(6x^3 + 5\right)^{\frac{5}{4}} + c $$

As always, we can check our answer with a quick derivative if we'd like to and
don’t forget to "back substitute" and get the integral back into terms of the
original variable.

What we’ve done in the work above is called the **Substitution Rule**. Here is
the substitution rule in general.

**Substitution Rule**

> $$ \int{f(g(x))g'(x)\, dx} = \int{f(u)\, du} \text{, } \quad \text{ where, } u = g(x) $$

A natural question at this stage is how to identify the correct substitution.
Unfortunately, the answer is it depends on the integral. However, there is a
general rule of thumb that will work for many of the integrals that we're going
to be running across.

When faced with an integral we'll ask ourselves what we know how to integrate.
With the integral above we can quickly recognize that we know how to integrate

$$ \int{\sqrt[4]{x}\, dx} $$

However, we didn't have just the root we also had stuff in front of the root and
(more importantly in this case) stuff under the root. Since we can only
integrate roots if there is just an $x$ under the root a good first guess for
the substitution is then to make $u$ be the stuff under the root.

Another way to think of this is to ask yourself if you were to differentiate the
integrand (we're not of course, but just for a second pretend that we were) is
there a chain rule and what is the inside function for the chain rule. If there
is a chain rule (for a derivative) then there is a pretty good chance that the
inside function will be the substitution that will allow us to do the integral.

We will have to be careful however. There are times when using this general rule
can get us in trouble or overly complicate the problem. We'll eventually see
problems where there are more than one "inside function" and/or integrals that
will look very similar and yet use completely different substitutions. The
reality is that the only way to really learn how to do substitutions is to just
work lots of problems and eventually you'll start to get a feel for how these
work and you'll find it easier and easier to identify the proper substitutions.

Now, with that out of the way we should ask the following question. How, do we
know if we got the correct substitution? Well, upon computing the differential
and actually performing the substitution every $x$ in the integral (including
the $x$ in the $dx$) must disappear in the substitution process and the only
letters left should be $u$'s (including a $du$) and we should be left with an
integral that we can do.

If there are $x$'s left over or we have an integral that cannot be evaluated
then there is a pretty good chance that we chose the wrong substitution.
Unfortunately, however there is at least one case (we'll be seeing an example of
this in the next section) where the correct substitution will actually leave
some $x$'s and we’ll need to do a little more work to get it to work.

Again, it cannot be stressed enough at this point that the only way to really
learn how to do substitutions is to just work lots of problems. There are lots
of different kinds of problems and after working many problems you'll start to
get a real feel for these problems and after you work enough of them you'll
reach the point where you'll be able to do simple substitutions in your head
without having to actually write anything down.

As a final note we should point out that often (in fact in almost every case)
the differential will not appear exactly in the integrand as it did in the
example above and sometimes we'll need to do some manipulation of the integrand
and/or the differential to get all the $x$'s to disappear in the substitution.

Let's work some examples so we can get a better idea on how the substitution
rule works.

---

**Example 1** Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**(a)**
$\displaystyle \int{\left(1 - \frac{1}{2}\right)\cos\left(w - \ln w\right)\, dw}$

**Solution**

In this case it looks like we have a cosine with an inside function and so let's
use that as the substitution.

$$ u = w - \ln w \quad \quad du = \left(1 - \frac{1}{w}\right) dw $$

So, as with the first example we worked the stuff in front of the cosine appears
exactly in the differential. The integral is then,

$$ \int{\left(1 - \frac{1}{w}\right)\cos\left(w - \ln w\right)\, dw} = \int{\cos(u)\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \sin(u) + c $$

$$ \quad = \sin(w - \ln w) + c $$

Don't forget to go back to the original variable in the problem.

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{3(8y - 1)\mathbf{e}^{4y^2 - y}\, dy}$

**Solution**

Again, it looks like we have an exponential function with an inside function
(_i.e._ the exponent) and it looks like the substitution should be,

$$ u = 4y^2 - y \quad \quad du = (8y - 1) dy $$

Now, with the exception of the 3 the stuff in front of the exponential appears
exactly in the differential. Recall however that we can factor the 3 out of the
integral and so it won't cause any problems. The integral is then,

$$ \int{3(8y - 1)\mathbf{e}^{4y^2 - y}\, dy} = 3\int{\mathbf{e}^u\, du} $$

$$ \quad = 3\mathbf{e}^u + c $$

$$ \quad = 3\mathbf{e}^{4y^2 - y} + c $$

**\(c\)** $\displaystyle \int{x^2\left(3 - 10x^3\right)^4\, dx}$

**Solution**

In this case it looks like the following should be the substitution.

$$ u = 3 - 10x^3 \quad \quad du = -30x^2 dx $$

Okay, now we have a small problem. We've got an $x^2$ out in front of the
parenthesis but we don’t have a "-30"". This is not really the problem it might
appear to be at first. We will simply rewrite the differential as follows.

$$ x^2 dx = -\frac{1}{30} du $$

With this we can now substitute the $x^2 dx$ away. In the process we will pick
up a constant, but that isn't a problem since it can always be factored out of
the integral.

We can now do the integral.

$$ \int{x^2\left(3 - 10x^3\right)^4\, dx} = \int{\left(3 - 10x^3\right)^4x^2\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = \int{u^4\left(-\frac{1}{30}\right)\, du} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{30}\left(\frac{1}{5}\right)u^5 + c $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{150}\left(3 - 10x^3\right)^5 + c $$

Note that in most problems when we pick up a constant as we did in this example
we will generally factor it out of the integral in the same step that we
substitute it in.

**(d)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{x}{\sqrt{1 - 4x^2}}\, dx}$

**Solution**

In this example don't forget to bring the root up to the numerator and change it
into fractional exponent form. Upon doing this we can see that the substitution
is,

$$ u = 1 - 4x^2 \quad \quad du = -8x dx \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad x dx = -\frac{1}{8}du $$

The integral is then,

$$ \int{\frac{x}{\sqrt{1 - 4x^2}}\, dx} = \int{x\left(1 - 4x^2\right)^{-\frac{1}{2}}\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{8}\int{u^{-\frac{1}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{4}u^{\frac{1}{2}} + c $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{4}\left(1 - 4x^2\right)^{\frac{1}{2}} + c $$

---

In the previous set of examples the substitution was generally pretty clear.
There was exactly one term that had an "inside function" and so there wasn't
really much in the way of options for the substitution. Let's take a look at
some more complicated problems to make sure we don't come to expect all
substitutions are like those in the previous set of examples.

---

**Example 2** Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{\sin(1 - x)\left(2 - \cos(1 - x)\right)^4\, dx}$

**Solution**

In this problem there are two "inside functions". There is the $1 - x$ that is
inside the two trig functions and there is also the term that is raised to the
4<sup>th</sup> power.

There are two ways to proceed with this problem. The first idea that many
students have is substitute the $1 - x$ away. There is nothing wrong with doing
this but it doesn't eliminate the problem of the term to the 4<sup>th</sup>
power. That's still there and if we used this idea we would then need to do a
second substitution to deal with that.

The second (and much easier) way of doing this problem is to just deal with the
stuff raised to the 4<sup>th</sup> power and see what we get. The substitution
in this case would be,

$$ u = 2 - \cos(1 - x) \quad \quad du = -\sin(1 - x)dx \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad \sin(1 - x)dx = -du $$

Two things to note here. First, don't forget to correctly deal with the "-". A
common mistake at this point is to lose it. Secondly, notice that the $1 - x$
turns out to not really be a problem after all. Because the $1 - x$ was "buried"
in the substitution that we actually used it was also taken care of at the same
time. The integral is then,

$$ \int{\sin(1 - x)\left(2 - \cos(1 - x)\right)^4\, dx} = -\int{u^4\, du} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{5}u^5 + c $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{5}\left(2 - \cos(1 - x)\right)^5 + c $$

As seen in this example sometimes there will seem to be two substitutions that
will need to be done however, if one of them is buried inside of another
substitution then we’ll only really need to do one. Recognizing this can save a
lot of time in working some of these problems.

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{\cos(3z)\sin^{10}(3z)\, dz}$

**Solution**

This one is a little tricky at first. We can see the correct substitution by
recalling that,

$$ \sin^{10}(3z) = \left(\sin(3z)\right)^{10} $$

Using this it looks like the correct substitution is,

$$ u = \sin(3z) \quad \quad du = 3\cos(3z)dz \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad \cos(3z)dz = \frac{1}{3}du $$

Notice that we again had two apparent substitutions in this integral but again
the $3z$ is buried in the substitution we’re using and so we didn't need to
worry about it.

Here is the integral.

$$ \int{\cos(3z)\sin^{10}(3z)\, dz} = \frac{1}{3}\int{u^{10}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{3}\left(\frac{1}{11}\right)u^{11} + c $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{33}\sin^{11}(3z) + c $$

Note that the one third in front of the integral came about from the
substitution on the differential and we just factored it out to the front of the
integral. This is what we will usually do with these constants.

**\(c\)** $\displaystyle \int{\sec^2(4t)\left(3 - \tan(4t)\right)^3\, dt}$

**Solution**

In this case we’ve got a $4t$, a secant squared as well as a term cubed.
However, it looks like if we use the following substitution the first two issues
are going to be taken care of for us.

$$ u = 3 - \tan(4t) \quad \quad du = -4\sec^2(4t)dt \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad \sec^2(4t)dt = -\frac{1}{4}du $$

The integral is now,

$$ \int{\sec^2(4t)\left(3 - \tan(4t)\right)^3\, dt} = -\frac{1}{4}\int{u^3\, du} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{16}u^4 + c $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{16}\left(3 - \tan(4t)\right)^4 + c $$

---

The most important thing to remember in substitution problems is that after the
substitution all the original variables need to disappear from the integral.
After the substitution the only variables that should be present in the integral
should be the new variable from the substitution (usually $u$). Note as well
that this includes the variables in the differential!

This next set of examples, while not particularly difficult, can cause trouble
if we aren’t paying attention to what we're doing.

---

**Example 3** Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{3}{5y + 4}\, dy}$

**Solution**

We haven't seen a problem quite like this one yet. Let's notice that if we take
the denominator and differentiate it we get just a constant and the only thing
that we have in the numerator is also a constant. This is a pretty good
indication that we can use the denominator for our substitution so,

$$ u = 5y + 4 \quad \quad du = 5dy \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad dy = \frac{1}{5}du $$

The integral is now,

$$ \int{\frac{3}{5y + 4}\, dy} = \frac{3}{5}\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{3}{5}\ln|u| + c $$

$$ \quad = \frac{3}{5}\ln|5y + 4| + c $$

Remember that we can just factor the 3 in the numerator out of the integral and
that makes the integral a little clearer in this case.

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{3y}{5y^2 + 4}\, dy}$

**Solution**

The integral is very similar to the previous one with a couple of minor
differences but notice that again if we differentiate the denominator we get
something that is different from the numerator by only a multiplicative
constant. Therefore, we'll again take the denominator as our substitution.

$$ u = 5y^2 + 4 \quad \quad du = 10ydy \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad ydy = \frac{1}{10}du $$

The integral is,

$$ \int{\frac{3y}{5y^2 + 4}\, dy} = \frac{3}{10}\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{3}{10}\ln|u| + c $$

$$ \quad = \frac{3}{10}\ln|5y^2 + 4| + c $$

**\(c\)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{3y}{\left(5y^2 + 4\right)^2}\, dy}$

**Solution**

Now, this one is almost identical to the previous part except we added a power
onto the denominator. Notice however that if we ignore the power and
differentiate what's left we get the same thing as the previous example so we'll
use the same substitution here.

$$ u = 5y^2 + 4 \quad \quad du = 10ydy \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad ydy = \frac{1}{10}du $$

The integral in this case is,

$$ \int{\frac{3y}{\left(5y^2 + 4\right)^2}\, dy} = \frac{3}{10}\int{u^{-2}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{3}{10}u^{-1} + c $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{3}{10}\left(5y^2 + 4\right)^{-1} + c = -\frac{3}{10\left(5y^2 + 4\right)} + c $$

Be careful in this case to not turn this into a logarithm. After working
problems like the first two in this set a common error is to turn every rational
expression into a logarithm. If there is a power on the whole denominator then
there is a good chance that it isn’t a logarithm.

The idea that we used in the last three parts to determine the substitution is
not a bad idea to remember. If we've got a rational expression try
differentiating the denominator (ignoring any powers that are on the whole
denominator) and if the result is the numerator or only differs from the
numerator by a multiplicative constant then we can usually use that as our
substitution.

**(d)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{3}{5y^2 + 4}\, dy}$

**Solution**

Now, this part is completely different from the first three and yet seems
similar to them as well. In this case if we differentiate the denominator we get
a $y$ that is not in the numerator and so we can’t use the denominator as our
substitution.

In fact, because we have $y^2$ in the denominator and no $y$ in the numerator is
an indication of how to work this problem. This integral is going to be an
inverse tangent when we are done. The key to seeing this is to recall the
following formula,

$$ \int{\frac{1}{1 + u^2}\, du} = \tan^{-1}u + c $$

We clearly don’t have exactly this but we do have something that is similar. The
denominator has a squared term plus a constant and the numerator is just a
constant. So, with a little work and the proper substitution we should be able
to get our integral into a form that will allow us to use this formula.

There is one part of this formula that is really important and that is the "1+"
in the denominator. The "1+" must be there and we've got a "4+" but it is easy
enough to take care of that. We'll just factor a 4 out of the denominator and at
the same time we'll factor the 3 in the numerator out of the integral as well.
Doing this gives,

$$ \int{\frac{3}{5y^2 + 4}\, dy} = \int{\frac{3}{4\left(\frac{5y^2}{4} + 1\right)}\, dy} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{3}{4}\int{\frac{1}{\frac{5y^2}{4} + 1}\, dy} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{3}{4}\int{\frac{1}{\left(\frac{\sqrt{5}y}{2}\right)^2 + 1}\, dy} $$

Notice that in the last step we rewrote things a little in the denominator. This
will help us to see what the substitution needs to be. In order to get this
integral into the formula above we need to end up with $u^2$ in the denominator.
Our substitution will then need to be something that upon squaring gives us
$\frac{5y^2}{4}$. With the rewrite we can see what that we’ll need to use the
following substitution.

$$ u = \frac{\sqrt{5}y}{2} \quad \quad du = \frac{\sqrt{5}}{2}dy \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad dy = \frac{2}{\sqrt{5}}du $$

Don't get excited about the root in the substitution, these will show up on
occasion. Upon plugging our substitution in we get,

$$ \int{\frac{3}{5y^2 + 4}\, dy} = \frac{3}{4}\left(\frac{2}{\sqrt{5}}\right)\int{\frac{1}{u^2 + 1}\, du} $$

After doing the substitution, and factoring any constants out, we get exactly
the integral that gives an inverse tangent and so we know that we did the
correct substitution for this integral. The integral is then,

$$ \int{\frac{3}{5y^2 + 4}\, dy} = \frac{3}{2\sqrt{5}}\int{\frac{1}{u^2 + 1}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{3}{2\sqrt{5}}\tan^{-1}(u) + c $$

$$ \quad = \frac{3}{2\sqrt{5}}\tan^{-1}\left(\frac{\sqrt{5}y}{2}\right) + c $$

---

In this last set of integrals we had four integrals that were similar to each
other in many ways and yet all either yielded different answer using the same
substitution or used a completely different substitution than one that was
similar to it.

This is a fairly common occurrence and so you will need to be able to deal with
these kinds of issues. There are many integrals that on the surface look very
similar and yet will use a completely different substitution or will yield a
completely different answer when using the same substitution.

Let's take a look at another set of examples to give us more practice in
recognizing these kinds of issues. Note however that we won’t be putting as much
detail into these as we did with the previous examples.

---

**Example 4** Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{2t^3 + 1}{\left(t^4 + 2t\right)^3}\, dt}$

**Solution**

Clearly the derivative of the denominator, ignoring the exponent, differs from
the numerator only by a multiplicative constant and so the substitution is,

$$ u = t^4 + 2t \quad \quad du = \left(4t^3 + 2\right)dt = 2\left(2t^3 + 1\right)dt \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad \left(2t^3 + 1\right)dt = \frac{1}{2}du $$

After a little manipulation of the differential we get the following integral.

$$ \int{\frac{2t^3 + 1}{\left(t^4 + 2t\right)^3}\, dt} = \frac{1}{2}\int{\frac{1}{u^3}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\int{u^{-3}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right)u^{-2} + c $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{4}\left(t^4 + 2t\right)^{-2} + c $$

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{2t^3 + 1}{t^4 + 2t}\, dt}$

**Solution**

The only difference between this problem and the previous one is the
denominator. In the previous problem the whole denominator is cubed and in this
problem the denominator has no power on it. The same substitution will work in
this problem but because we no longer have the power the problem will be
different.

So, using the substitution from the previous example the integral is,

$$ \int{\frac{2t^3 + 1}{t^4 + 2t}\, dt} = \frac{1}{2}\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\ln|u| + c $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\ln|t^4 + 2t| + c $$

So, in this case we get a logarithm from the integral.

**\(c\)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{x}{\sqrt{1 - 4x^2}}\, dx}$

**Solution**

Here, if we ignore the root we can again see that the derivative of the stuff
under the radical differs from the numerator by only a multiplicative constant
and so we'll use that as the substitution.

$$ u = 1 - 4x^2 \quad \quad du = -8xdx \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad xdx = -\frac{1}{8}du $$

The integral is then,

$$ \int{\frac{x}{\sqrt{1 - 4x^2}}\, dx} = -\frac{1}{8}\int{u^{-\frac{1}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{8}(2)u^{\frac{1}{2}} + c $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{4}\sqrt{1 - 4x^2} + c $$

**(d)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - 4x^2}}\, dx}$

**Solution**

In this case we are missing the $x$ in the numerator and so the substitution
from the last part will do us no good here. This integral is another inverse
trig function integral that is similar to the last part of the previous set of
problems. In this case we need to following formula.

$$ \int{\frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - u^2}}\, du} = \sin^{-1}u + c $$

The integral in this problem is nearly this. The only difference is the presence
of the coefficient of 4 on the $x^2$. With the correct substitution this can be
dealt with however. To see what this substitution should be let's rewrite the
integral a little. We need to figure out what we squared to get $4x^2$ and that
will be our substitution.

$$ \int{\frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - 4x^2}}\, dx} = \int{\frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - (2x)^2}}\, dx} $$

With this rewrite it looks like we can use the following substitution.

$$ u = 2x \quad \quad du = 2dx \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad dx = \frac{1}{2}du $$

The integral is then,

$$ \int{\frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - 4x^2}}\, dx} = \frac{1}{2}\int{\frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - u^2}}\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\sin^{-1}u + c $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\sin^{-1}(2x) + c $$

---

Since this document is also being presented on the web we're going to put the
rest of the substitution rule examples in the next section. With all the
examples in one section the section was becoming too large for web presentation.

---

## Practice Problems

For problems 1 - 16 evaluate the given integral.

**1.** $\displaystyle \int{(8x - 12)\left(4x^2 - 12x\right)^4\, dx}$

**Solution**

**2.** $\displaystyle \int{3t^{-4}\left(2 + 4t^{-3}\right)^{-7}\, dt}$

**Solution**

**3.** $\displaystyle \int{(3 - 4w)\left(4w^2 - 6w + 7\right)^{10}\, dw}$

**Solution**

**4.** $\displaystyle \int{5(z - 4)\sqrt[3]{z^2 - 8z}\, dz}$

**Solution**

**5.** $\displaystyle \int{90x^2\sin\left(2 + 6x^3\right)\, dx}$

**Solution**

**6.** $\displaystyle \int{\sec(1 - z)\tan(1 - z)\, dz}$

**Solution**

**7.**
$\displaystyle \int{\left(15t^{-2} - 5t\right)\cos\left(6t^{-1} + t^2\right)\, dt}$

**Solution**

**8.** $\displaystyle \int{\left(7y - 2y^3\right)\mathbf{e}^{y^4 - 7y^2}\, dy}$

**Solution**

**9.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{4w + 3}{4w^2 + 6w - 1}\, dw}$

**Solution**

**10.**
$\displaystyle \int{\left(\cos(3t) - t^2\right)\left(\sin(3t) - t^3\right)^5\, dt}$

**Solution**

**11.**
$\displaystyle \int{4\left(\frac{1}{z} - \mathbf{e}^{-z}\right)\cos\left(\mathbf{e}^{-z} + \ln z\right)\, dz}$

**Solution**

**12.** $\displaystyle \int{\sec^2(v)\mathbf{e}^{1 + \tan(v)}\, dv}$

**Solution**

**13.** $\displaystyle \int{10\sin(2x)\cos(2x)\sqrt{\cos^2(2x) + 5}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**14.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{\csc(x)\cot(x)}{2 - \csc(x)}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**15.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{6}{7 + y^2}\, dy}$

**Solution**

**16.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{1}{\sqrt{4 - 9w^2}}\, dw}$

**Solution**

**17.** Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{3x}{1 + 9x^2}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{3x}{\left(1 + 9x^2\right)^4}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**\(c\)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{3}{1 + 9x^2}\, dx}$

**Solution**

---

## Assignment Problems

For problems 1 - 31 evaluate the given integral.

**1.** $\displaystyle \int{12v\left(7 + 6v^2\right)^9\, dv}$

**Solution**

**2.**
$\displaystyle \int{\left(4x^3 - 12x\right)\left(x^4 - 6x^2\right)^{-3}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**3.** $\displaystyle \int{\left(z^2 - 4\right)\left(12z - z^3\right)^4\, dz}$

**Solution**

**4.** $\displaystyle \int{7z^2\left(14 + 8z^3\right)^{-5}\, dz}$

**Solution**

**5.**
$\displaystyle \int{3\left(y^6 - 4y^{-3}\right)\left(y^7 + 14y^{-2} - 7\right)^6\, dy}$

**Solution**

**6.** $\displaystyle \int{\left(\frac{1}{2}x^3 - 1\right)\sqrt{8x - x^4}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**7.**
$\displaystyle \int{\left(6w^{-4} + 12w^{-7}\right)\sqrt[4]{w^{-3} + w^{-6}}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**8.** $\displaystyle \int{\cos(7t)\, dt}$

**Solution**

**9.**
$\displaystyle \int{\left(v - 2v^3\right)\cos\left(v^2 - v^4\right)\, dv}$

**Solution**

**10.** $\displaystyle \int{\sqrt{z}\sin\left(1 + \sqrt{z^3}\right)\, dz}$

**Solution**

**11.** $\displaystyle \int{\csc^2(1 + 2x)\, dx}$

**Solution**

**12.**
$\displaystyle \int{7w^{-5}\sec\left(w^{-4}\right)\tan\left(w^{-4}\right)\, dw}$

**Solution**

**13.** $\displaystyle \int{\left(2 - t^2\right)\mathbf{e}^{6t - t^3}\, dt}$

**Solution**

**14.** $\displaystyle \int{12z^{-2}\mathbf{e}^{4 + z^{-1}}\, dz}$

**Solution**

**15.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{1}{4 - 9w}\, dw}$

**Solution**

**16.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{9y}{y^2 + 3}\, dy}$

**Solution**

**17.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{6x^2 - 10x^4}{x^5 - x^3}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**18.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{1}{t}\sin\left(1 - \ln(t)\right)\, dt}$

**Solution**

**19.**
$\displaystyle \int{\left[6v - 18\sin(6v)\right]\sqrt[5]{v^2 + \cos(6v)}\, dv}$

**Solution**

**20.**
$\displaystyle \int{\mathbf{e}^{-3z}\sec\left(\mathbf{e}^{-3z}\right)\tan\left(\mathbf{e}^{-3z}\right)\, dz}$

**Solution**

**21.**
$\displaystyle \int{\left(\cos(x) + \sin(x)\right)\mathbf{e}^{\sin(x) - \cos(x)}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**22.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{\left[\ln\left(w^2\right)\right]^4}{w}\, dw}$

**Solution**

**23.** $\displaystyle \int{\cos(v)\cos\left(1 + \sin(v)\right)\, dv}$

**Solution**

**24.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{y + \sin(2y)}{y^2 - \cos(2y)}\, dy}$

**Solution**

**25.** $\displaystyle \int{\sec^7(t)\tan(t)\, dt}$

**Solution**

**26.**
$\displaystyle \int{\mathbf{e}^z\sec^2\left(\mathbf{e}^z\right)\left[1 + \tan\left(\mathbf{e}^z\right)\right]^{-3}\, dz}$

**Solution**

**27.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{7}{1 + 5x^2}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**28.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{2}{3 + 4t^2}\, dt}$

**Solution**

**29.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{1}{\sqrt{16 - y^2}}\, dy}$

**Solution**

**30.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{3}{\sqrt{7 - 4v^2}}\, dv}$

**Solution**

**31.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{x}{1 + x^4}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**32.** Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{1}{3 + x}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{x}{3 + x^2}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**\(c\)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{x}{\left(3 + x^2\right)^7}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**(d)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{1}{3 + x^2}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**33.** Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{4w}{25 + 9w^2}\, dw}$

**Solution**

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{4w}{\left(25 + 9w^2\right)^3}\, dw}$

**Solution**

**\(c\)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{4}{25 + 9w^2}\, dw}$

**Solution**
