# Section 5.4 : More Substitution Rule

In order to allow these pages to be displayed on the web we've broken the
substitution rule examples into two sections. The previous section contains the
introduction to the substitution rule and some fairly basic examples. The
examples in this section tend towards the slightly more difficult side. Also,
we'll not be putting quite as much explanation into the solutions here as we did
in the previous section.

In the first couple of sets of problems in this section the difficulty is not
with the actual integration itself, but with the set up for the integration.
Most of the integrals are fairly simple and most of the substitutions are fairly
simple. The problems arise in getting the integral set up properly for the
substitution(s) to be done. Once you see how these are done it's easy to see
what you have to do, but the first time through these can cause problems if you
aren’t on the lookout for potential problems.

---

**Example 1** Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{\mathbf{e}^{2t} + \sec(2t)\tan(2t)\, dt}$

**Solution**

This first integral has two terms in it and both will require the same
substitution. This means that we won't have to do anything special to the
integral. One of the more common "mistakes" here is to break the integral up and
do a separate substitution on each part. This isn't really mistake but will
definitely increase the amount of work we'll need to do. So, since both terms in
the integral use the same substitution we'll just do everything as a single
integral using the following substitution.

$$ u = 2t \quad \quad du = 2dt \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad dt = \frac{1}{2}du $$

The integral is then,

$$ \int{\mathbf{e}^{2t} + \sec(2t)\tan(2t)\, dt} = \frac{1}{2}\int{\mathbf{e}^u + \sec(u)\tan(u)\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\left(\mathbf{e}^u + \sec(u)\right) + c $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\left(\mathbf{e}^{2t} + \sec(2t)\right) + c $$

Often a substitution can be used multiple times in an integral so don't get
excited about that if it happens. Also note that since there was a
$\dfrac{1}{2}$ in front of the whole integral there must also be a
$\dfrac{1}{2}$ in front of the answer from the integral.

**(b)**
$\displaystyle \int{\sin(t)\left(4\cos^3(t) + 6\cos^2(t) - 8\right)\, dt}$

**Solution**

This integral is similar to the previous one, but it might not look like it at
first glance. Here is the substitution for this problem,

$$ u = \cos(t) \quad \quad du = -\sin(t)dt \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad \sin(t)dt = -du $$

We'll plug the substitution into the problem twice (since there are two cosines)
and will only work because there is a sine multiplying everything. Without that
sine in front we would not be able to use this substitution.

The integral in this case is,

$$ \int{\sin(t)\left(4\cos^3(t) + 6\cos^2(t) - 8\right)\, dt} = -\int{4u^3 + 6u^2 - 8\, du} $$

$$ \quad = -\left(u^4 + 2u^3 - 8u\right) +  $$

$$ \quad = -\left(\cos^4(t) + 2\cos^3(t) - 8\cos(t)\right) + c $$

Again, be careful with the minus sign in front of the whole integral.

**\(c\)**
$\displaystyle \int{x\cos\left(x^2 + 1\right) + \frac{1}{x^2 + 1}\, dx}$

**Solution**

It should be fairly clear that each term in this integral will use the same
substitution, but let's rewrite things a little to make things really clear.

$$ \int{x\cos\left(x^2 + 1\right) + \frac{x}{x^2 + 1}\, dx} = \int{x\left(\cos\left(x^2 + 1\right) + \frac{1}{x^2 + 1}\right)\, dx} $$

Since each term had an $x$ in it and we’ll need that for the differential we
factored that out of both terms to get it into the front. This integral is now
very similar to the previous one. Here's the substitution.

$$ u = x^2 + 1 \quad \quad du = 2xdx \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad xdx = \frac{1}{2}du $$

The integral is,

$$ \int{x\cos\left(x^2 + 1\right) + \frac{x}{x^2 + 1}\, dx} = \frac{1}{2}\int{\cos(u) + \frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\left(\sin(u) + \ln|u|\right) + c $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\left(\sin\left(x^2 + 1\right) + \ln|x^2 + 1|\right) + c $$

---

So, as we've seen in the previous set of examples sometimes we can use the same
substitution more than once in an integral and doing so will simplify the work.

---

**Example 2** Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{x^2 + \mathbf{e}y{1 - x}\, dx}$

**Solution**

In this integral the first term does not need any substitution while the second
term does need a substitution. So, to deal with that we'll need to split the
integral up as follows,

$$ \int{x^2 + \mathbf{e}y{1 - x}\, dx} = \int{x^2\, dx} + \int{\mathbf{e}^{1 - x}\, dx} $$

The substitution for the second integral is then,

$$ u = 1 - x \quad \quad du = -dx \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad dx = -du $$

The integral is,

$$ \int{x^2 + \mathbf{e}^{1 - }\, dx} = \int{x^2\, dx} - \int{\mathbf{e}^u\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{3}x^3 - \mathbf{e}^u + c $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{3}x^3 - \mathbf{e}^{1 - x} + c $$

Be careful with this kind of integral. One of the more common mistakes here is
do the following "shortcut".

$$ \int{x^2 + \mathbf{e}^{1 - x}\, dx} = -\int{x^2 + \mathbf{e}^u\, du} $$

In other words, some students will try do the substitution just the second term
without breaking up the integral. There are two issues with this. First, there
is a "-" in front of the whole integral that shouldn’t be there. It should only
be on the second term because that is the term getting the substitution.
Secondly, and probably more importantly, there are $x$'s in the integral and we
have a $du$ for the differential. We can't mix variables like this. When we do
integrals all the variables in the integrand must match the variable in the
differential.

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{x\cos\left(x^2 + 1\right) + \frac{1}{x^2 + 1}\, dx}$

**Solution**

This integral looks very similar to Example 1c above, but it is different. In
this integral we no longer have the $x$ in the numerator of the second term and
that means that the substitution we'll use for the first term will no longer
work for the second term. In fact, the second term doesn't need a substitution
at all since it is just an inverse tangent.

The substitution for the first term is then,

$$ u = x^2 + 1 \quad \quad du = 2xdx \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad xdx = \frac{1}{2}du $$

Now let's do the integral. Remember to first break it up into two terms before
using the substitution.

$$ \int{x\cos\left(x^2 + 1\right) + \frac{1}{x^2 + 1}\, dx} = \int{x\cos\left(x^2 + 1\right)\, dx} + \int{\frac{1}{x^2 + 1}\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\int{\cos(u)\, du} + \int{\frac{1}{x^2 + 1}\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\sin(u) + \tan^{-1}(x) + c $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\sin\left(x^2 + 1\right) + \tan^{-1}(x) + c $$

---

In this set of examples we saw that sometimes one (or potentially more than one)
term in the integrand will not require a substitution. In these cases we'll need
to break up the integral into two integrals, one involving the terms that don't
need a substitution and another with the term(s) that do need a substitution.

---

**Example 3** Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**(a)**
$\displaystyle \int{\mathbf{e}^{-z} + \sec^2\left(\frac{z}{10}\right)\, dz}$

**Solution**

In this integral, unlike any integrals that we’ve yet done, there are two terms
and each will require a different substitution. So, to do this integral we'll
first need to split up the integral as follows,

$$ \int{\mathbf{e}^{-z} + \sec^2\left(\frac{z}{10}\right)\, dz} = \int{\mathbf{e}^{-z}\, dz} + \int{\sec^2\left(\frac{z}{10}\right)\, dz} $$

Here are the substitutions for each integral.

$$ u = -z \quad \quad du = -dz \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad dz = -du $$

$$ v =\frac{z}{10} \quad \quad dv = \frac{1}{10}dz \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad dz = 10dv $$

Notice that we used different letters for each substitution to avoid confusion
when we go to plug back in for $u$ and $v$.

Here is the integral.

$$ \int{\mathbf{e}^{-z} + \sec^2\left(\frac{z}{10}\right)\, dz} = -\int{\mathbf{e}^u\, du} + 10\int{\sec^2(v)\, dv} $$

$$ \quad = -\mathbf{e}^u + 10\tan(v) + c $$

$$ \quad = -\mathbf{e}^{-z} + 10\tan\left(\frac{z}{10}\right) + c $$

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{\sin w\sqrt{1 - 2\cos w} + \frac{1}{7w + 2}\, dw}$

**Solution**

As with the last problem this integral will require two separate substitutions.
Let’s first break up the integral.

$$ \int{\sin w\sqrt{1 - 2\cos w} + \frac{1}{7w + 2}\, dw} = \int{\sin w\left(1 - 2\cos w\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\, dw} + \int{\frac{1}{7w + 2}\, dw} $$

Here are the substitutions for this integral.

$$ u = 1 - 2\cos(w) \quad \quad du = 2\sin(w)dw \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad \sin(w)dw = \frac{1}{2}du $$

$$ v = 7w + 2 \quad \quad dv = 7dw \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad dw = \frac{1}{7}dv $$

The integral is then,

$$ \int{\sin w\sqrt{1 - 2\cos w} + \frac{1}{7w + 2}\, dw} = \frac{1}{2}\int{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} + \frac{1}{7}\int{\frac{1}{v}\, dv} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)u^{\frac{3}{2}} + \frac{1}{7}\ln|v| +  $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{3}\left(1 - 2\cos w\right)^{\frac{3}{2}} + \frac{1}{7}\ln|7w + 2| + c $$

**\(c\)**
$\displaystyle \int{\mathbf{e}^{-z} + \sec^2\left(\frac{z}{10}\right)\, dz}$

**Solution**

The last problem in this set can be tricky. If there was just an $x$ in the
numerator we could do a quick substitution to get a natural logarithm. Likewise,
if there wasn't an $x$ in the numerator we would get an inverse tangent after a
quick substitution.

To get this integral into a form that we can work with we will first need to
break it up as follows.

$$ \int{\frac{10x + 3}{x^2 + 16}\, dx} = \int{\frac{10x}{x^2 + 16}\, dx} + \int{\frac{3}{x^2 + 16}\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = \int{\frac{10x}{x^2 + 16}\, dx} + \frac{1}{16}\int{\frac{3}{\frac{x^2}{16} + 1}\, dx} $$

We now have two integrals each requiring a different substitution. The
substitutions for each of the integrals above are,

$$ u = x^2 + 16 \quad \quad du = 2xdx \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad xdx = \frac{1}{2}du $$

$$ v = \frac{x}{4} \quad \quad dv = \frac{1}{4}dx \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad dx = 4dv $$

The integral is then,

$$ \int{\frac{10x + 3}{x^2 + 16}\, dx} = 5\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} + \frac{3}{4}\int{\frac{1}{v^2 + 1}\, dv} $$

$$ \quad = 5\ln|u| + \frac{3}{4}\tan^{-1}(v) + c $$

$$ \quad = 5\ln|x^2 + 16| + \frac{3}{4}\tan^{-1}\left(\frac{x}{4}\right) + c $$

---

We've now seen a set of integrals in which we need to do more than one
substitution. In these cases we will need to break up the integral into separate
integrals and do separate substitutions for each.

We now need to move onto a different set of examples that can be a little
tricky. Once you've seen how to do these they aren't too bad but doing them for
the first time can be difficult if you aren't ready for them.

---

**Example 4** Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{\tan x\, dx}$

**Solution**

The first question about this problem is probably why is it here? Substitution
rule problems generally require more than a single function. The key to this
problem is to realize that there really are two functions here. All we need to
do is remember the definition of tangent and we can write the integral as,

$$ \int{\tan x\, dx} = \int{\frac{\sin x}{\cos x}\, dx} $$

Written in this way we can see that the following substitution will work for us,

$$ u = \cos x \quad \quad du = -\sin xdx \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad \sin xdx = -du $$

The integral is then,

$$ \int{\tan x\, dx} = -\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = -\ln|u| + c $$

$$ \quad = -\ln|\cos x| + c $$

Now, while this is a perfectly serviceable answer that minus sign in front is
liable to cause problems if we aren't careful. So, let's rewrite things a
little. Recalling a
[**property**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/LogFcns.aspx#More_Log_Prop)
of logarithms we can move the minus sign in front to an exponent on the cosine
and then do a little simplification.

$$ \int{\tan x\, dx} = -\ln|\cos x| + c $$

$$ \quad = \ln|\cos x|^{-1} + c $$

$$ \quad = \ln\frac{1}{|cos x|} + c $$

$$ \quad = \ln|\sec x| + c $$

This is the formula that is typically given for the integral of tangent.

Note that we could integrate cotangent in a similar manner.

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{\sec y\, dy}$

**Solution**

This problem also at first appears to not belong in the substitution rule
problems. This is even more of a problem upon noticing that we can't just use
the definition of the secant function to write this in a form that will allow
the use of the substitution rule.

This problem is going to require a technique that isnt used terribly often at
this level but is a useful technique to be aware of. Sometimes we can make an
integral doable by multiplying the top and bottom by a common term. This will
not always work and even when it does it is not always clear what we should
multiply by but when it works it is very useful.

Here is how we’ll use this idea for this problem.

$$ \int{\sec y\, dy} = \int{\frac{\sec y}{1}\frac{\left(\sec y + \tan y\right)}{\left(\sec y + \tan y\right)}\, dy} $$

First, we will think of the secant as a fraction and then multiply the top and
bottom of the fraction by the same term. It is probably not clear why one would
want to do this here but doing this will actually allow us to use the
substitution rule. To see how this will work let's simplify the integrand
somewhat.

$$ \int{\sec y\, dy} = \int{\frac{\sec^2y + \tan y\sec y}{\sec y + \tan y}\, dy} $$

We can now use the following substitution.

$$ u = \sec y + \tan y \quad \quad du = \left(\sec y \tan y + \sec^2y\right)dy $$

The integral is then,

$$ \int{\sec y\, dy} = \int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \ln|u| + c $$

$$ \quad = \ln|\sec y + \tan y| + c $$

Sometimes multiplying the top and bottom of a fraction by a carefully chosen
term will allow us to work a problem. It does however take some thought
sometimes to determine just what the term should be.

We can use a similar process for integrating cosecant.

**\(c\)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{\cos\left(\sqrt{x}\right)}{\sqrt{x}}\, dx}$

**Solution**

This next problem has a subtlety to it that can get us in trouble if we aren't
paying attention. Because of the root in the cosine it makes some sense to use
the following substitution.

$$ u = x^{\frac{1}{2}} \quad \quad du = \frac{1}{2}x^{-\frac{1}{2}}dx $$

This is where we need to be careful. Upon rewriting the differential we get,

$$ 2du = \frac{1}{\sqrt{x}}dx $$

The root that is in the denominator will not become a $u$ as we might have been
tempted to do. Instead it will get taken care of in the differential.

The integral is,

$$ \int{\frac{\cos\left(\sqrt{x}\right)}{\sqrt{x}}\, dx} = 2\int{\cos(u)\, du} $$

$$ \quad = 2\sin(u) + c $$

$$ \quad = 2\sin\left(\sqrt{x}\right) + c $$

**(d)** $\displaystyle \int{\mathbf{e}^{t + \mathbf{e}^t}\, dt}$

**Solution**

With this problem we need to very carefully pick our substitution. As the
problem is written we might be tempted to use the following substitution,

$$ u = t + \mathbf{e}^t \quad \quad du = \left(1 + \mathbf{e}^t\right)dt $$

However, this won't work as you can probably see. The differential doesn't show
up anywhere in the integrand and we just wouldn't be able to eliminate all the
$t$'s with this substitution.

In order to work this problem we will need to rewrite the integrand as follows,

$$ \int{\mathbf{e}^{t + \mathbf{e}^t}\, dt} = \int{\mathbf{e}^t\mathbf{e}^{\mathbf{e}^t}\, dt} $$

We will now use the substitution,

$$ u = \mathbf{e}^t \quad \quad du = \mathbf{e}^tdt $$

The integral is,

$$ \int{\mathbf{e}^{t + \mathbf{e}^t}\, dt} = \int{\mathbf{e}^u\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \mathbf{e}^u + c $$

$$ \quad = \mathbf{e}^{\mathbf{e}^t} + c $$

Some substitutions can be really tricky to see and it’s not unusual that you'll
need to do some simplification and/or rewriting to get a substitution to work.

**(e)** $\displaystyle \int{2x^3\sqrt{x^2 + 1}\, dx}$

**Solution**

This last problem in this set is different from all the other substitution
problems that we've worked to this point. Given the fact that we've got more
than an $x$ under the root it makes sense that the substitution pretty much has
to be,

$$ u = x^2 + 1 \quad \quad du = 2xdx $$

At first glance it looks like this might not work for the substitution because
we have an $x^3$ in front of the root. However, if we rewrite $2x^3 = x^2(2x)$
we could then move the $2x$ to the end of the integral so at least the $du$ will
show up explicitly in the integral. Doing this gives the following,

$$ \int{2x^3\sqrt{x^2 + 1}\, dx} = \int{x^2\sqrt{x^2 + 1}(2x)\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = \int{x^2u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} $$

This is a real problem. Our integrals can't have two variables in them. Normally
this would mean that we chose our substitution incorrectly. However, in this
case we can rewrite the substitution as follows,

$$ x^2 = u - 1 $$

and now, we can eliminate the remaining $x$'s from our integral. Doing this
gives,

$$ \int{2x^3\sqrt{x^2 + 1}\, dx} = \int{(u - 1)u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, d} $$

$$ \quad = \int{u^{\frac{3}{2}} - u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{2}{5}u^{\frac{5}{2}} - \frac{2}{3}u^{\frac{3}{2}} + c $$

$$ \quad = \frac{2}{5}\left(x^2 + 1\right)^{\frac{5}{2}} - \frac{2}{3}\left(x^2 + 1\right)^{\frac{3}{2}} + c $$

Sometimes, we will need to use a substitution more than once.

This kind of problem doesn't arise all that often and when it does there will
sometimes be alternate methods of doing the integral. However, it will often
work out that the easiest method of doing the integral is to do what we just did
here.

---

This final set of examples isn't too bad once you see the substitutions and that
is the point with this set of problems. These all involve substitutions that
we've not seen prior to this and so we need to see some of these kinds of
problems.

---

**Example 5** Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{1}{x\ln x}\, dx}$

**Solution**

In this case we know that we can't integrate a logarithm by itself and so it
makes some sense (hopefully) that the logarithm will need to be in the
substitution. Here is the substitution for this problem.

$$ u = \ln x \quad \quad du = \frac{1}{x}dx $$

So, the $x$ in the denominator of the integrand will get substituted away with
the differential. Here is the integral for this problem.

$$ \int{\frac{1}{x \ln x}\, dx} = \int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \ln|u| + c $$

$$ \quad = \ln|\ln x| + c $$

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{\mathbf{e}^{2t}}{1 + \mathbf{e}^{2t}}\, dt}$

**Solution**

Again, the substitution here may seem a little tricky. In this case the
substitution is,

$$ u = 1 + \mathbf{e}^{2t} \quad \quad du = 2\mathbf{e}^{2t}dt \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad \mathbf{e}^{2t}dt = \frac{1}{2}du $$

The integral is then,

$$ \int{\frac{\mathbf{e}^{2t}}{1 + \mathbf{e}^{2t}}\, dt} = \frac{1}{2}\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\ln|1 + \mathbf{e}^{2t}| + c $$

**\(c\)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{\mathbf{e}^{2t}}{1 + \mathbf{e}^{4t}}\, dt}$

**Solution**

In this case we can't use the same type of substitution that we used in the
previous problem. In order to use the substitution in the previous example the
exponential in the numerator and the denominator need to be the same and in this
case they aren't.

To see the correct substitution for this problem note that,

$$ \mathbf{e}^{4t} = \left(\mathbf{e}^{2t}\right)^2 $$

Using this, the integral can be written as follows,

$$ \int{\frac{\mathbf{e}^{2t}}{1 + \mathbf{e}^{4t}}\, dt} = \int{\frac{\mathbf{e}^{2t}}{1 + \left(\mathbf{e}^{2t}\right)^2}\, dt} $$

We can now use the following substitution.

$$ u = \mathbf{e}^{2t} \quad \quad du = 2\mathbf{e}^{2t}dt \quad \quad \Rightarrow \quad \quad \mathbf{e}^{2t}dt = \frac{1}{2}du $$

The integral is then,

$$ \int{\frac{\mathbf{e}^{2t}}{1 + \mathbf{e}^{4t}}\, dt} = \frac{1}{2}\int{\frac{1}{1 + u^2}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\tan^{-1}(u) + c $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\tan^{-1}\left(\mathbf{e}^{2t}\right) + c $$

**(d)** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{\sin^{-1}x}{\sqrt{1 - x^2}}\, dx}$

**Solution**

This integral is similar to the first problem in this set. Since we don't know
how to integrate inverse sine functions it seems likely that this will be our
substitution. If we use this as our substitution we get,

$$ u = \sin^{-1}(x) \quad \quad du = \frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - x^2}}dx $$

So, the root in the integral will get taken care of in the substitution process
and this will eliminate all the $x$'s from the integral. Therefore, this was the
correct substitution.

The integral is,

$$ \int{\frac{\sin^{-1}x}{\sqrt{1 - x^2}}\, dx} = \int{u\, d} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}u^2 + c $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\left(\sin^{-1}x\right)^2 + c $$

---

Over the last couple of sections we've seen a lot of substitution rule examples.
There are a couple of general rules that we will need to remember when doing
these problems. First, when doing a substitution remember that when the
substitution is done all the $x$'s in the integral (or whatever variable is
being used for that particular integral) should all be substituted away. This
includes the $x$ in the $dx$. After the substitution only $u$'s should be left
in the integral. Also, sometimes the correct substitution is a little tricky to
find and more often than not there will need to be some manipulation of the
differential or integrand in order to actually do the substitution.

Also, many integrals will require us to break them up so we can do multiple
substitutions so be on the lookout for those kinds of integrals/substitutions.

---

## Practice Problems

Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**1.** $\displaystyle \int{4\sqrt{5 + 9t} + 12(5 + 9t)^7\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 5 + 9t \quad du = (9)dt \quad \frac{1}{9}du = dt $$

$$ \int{4\sqrt{5 + 9t} + 12(5 + 9t)^7\, dt} = \frac{1}{9}\int{4u^{\frac{1}{2}} + 12u^7\, du} $$

$$ \int{4\sqrt{5 + 9t} + 12(5 + 9t)^7\, dt} = \frac{1}{9}\left[(4)\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)u^{\frac{3}{2}} + 12\left(\frac{1}{8}\right)u^8\right] + c $$

$$ \int{4\sqrt{5 + 9t} + 12(5 + 9t)^7\, dt} = \frac{1}{9}\left[\frac{8}{3}u^{\frac{3}{2}} + \frac{3}{2}u^8\right] + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{4\sqrt{5 + 9t} + 12(5 + 9t)^7\, dt} = \frac{1}{9}\left[\frac{8}{3}(5 + 9t)^{\frac{3}{2}} + \frac{3}{2}(5 + 9t)^8\right] + c} $$

**2.**
$\displaystyle \int{7x^3\cos\left(2 + x^4\right) - 8x^3\mathbf{e}^{2 + x^4}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 2 + x^4 \quad du = \left(4x^3\right)dx \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{4}du = \left(x^3\right)dx $$

$$ \int{7x^3\cos\left(2 + x^4\right) - 8x^3\mathbf{e}^{2 + x^4}\, dx} = \frac{1}{4}\int{7\cos(u) - 8\mathbf{e}^u\, du} $$

$$ \int{7x^3\cos\left(2 + x^4\right) - 8x^3\mathbf{e}^{2 + x^4}\, dx} = \frac{1}{4}\left[7\sin(u) - 8\mathbf{e}^u\right] + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{7x^3\cos\left(2 + x^4\right) - 8x^3\mathbf{e}^{2 + x^4}\, dx} = \frac{1}{4}\left[7\sin\left(2 + x^4\right) - 8\mathbf{e}^{2 + x^4}\right] + c} $$

**3.**
$\displaystyle \int{\frac{6\mathbf{e}^{7w}}{\left(1 - 8\mathbf{e}^{7w}\right)^3} + \frac{14\mathbf{e}^{7w}}{1 - 8\mathbf{e}^{7w}}\, dw}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 1 - 8\mathbf{e}^{7w} \quad du = \left(-56\mathbf{e}^{7w}\right)dw \quad \rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{56}du = \left(\mathbf{e}^{7w}\right)dw $$

$$ \int{\frac{6\mathbf{e}^{7w}}{\left(1 - 8\mathbf{e}^{7w}\right)^3} + \frac{14\mathbf{e}^{7w}}{1 - 8\mathbf{e}^{7w}}\, dw} = -\frac{1}{56}\int{6u^{-3} + 14\left(\frac{1}{u}\right)\, du} $$

$$ \int{\frac{6\mathbf{e}^{7w}}{\left(1 - 8\mathbf{e}^{7w}\right)^3} + \frac{14\mathbf{e}^{7w}}{1 - 8\mathbf{e}^{7w}}\, dw} = -\frac{1}{56}\left[6\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right)u^{-2} + 14\ln|u|\right] + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{6\mathbf{e}^{7w}}{\left(1 - 8\mathbf{e}^{7w}\right)^3} + \frac{14\mathbf{e}^{7w}}{1 - 8\mathbf{e}^{7w}}\, dw} = -\frac{1}{56}\left[-3\left(1 - 8\mathbf{e}^{7w}\right)^{-2} + 14\ln|1 - 8\mathbf{e}^{7w}|\right] + c} $$

**4.** $\displaystyle \int{x^4 - 7x^5\cos\left(2x^6 + 3\right)\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{x^4 - 7x^5\cos\left(2x^6 + 3\right)\, dx} = \int{x^4\, dx} - \int{7x^5\cos\left(2x^6 + 3\right)\, dx} $$

$$ u = 2x^6 + 3 \quad du = \left(12x^5\right)dx \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{12}du = \left(x^5\right)dx $$

$$ \int{x^4 - 7x^5\cos\left(2x^6 + 3\right)\, dx} = \int{x^4\, dx} - \frac{7}{12}\int{\cos(u)\, du} $$

$$ \int{x^4 - 7x^5\cos\left(2x^6 + 3\right)\, dx} = \frac{1}{5}x^5 - \frac{7}{12}\sin(u) + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{x^4 - 7x^5\cos\left(2x^6 + 3\right)\, dx} = \frac{1}{5}x^5 - \frac{7}{12}\sin\left(2x^6 + 3\right) + c} $$

**5.** $\displaystyle \int{\mathbf{e}^z + \frac{4\sin(8z)}{1 + 9\cos(8z)}\, dz}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{\mathbf{e}^z + \frac{4\sin(8z)}{1 + 9\cos(8z)}\, dz} = \int{\mathbf{e}^z\, dz} + \int{\frac{4\sin(8z)}{1 + 9\cos(8z)}\, dz} $$

$$ u = 1 + 9\cos(8z) \quad du = \left(-72\sin(8z)\right)dz \quad \rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{72}du = (\sin(8z))dz $$

$$ \int{\mathbf{e}^z + \frac{4\sin(8z)}{1 + 9\cos(8z)}\, dz} = \int{\mathbf{e}^z\, dz} - \frac{4}{72}\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \int{\mathbf{e}^z + \frac{4\sin(8z)}{1 + 9\cos(8z)}\, dz} = \mathbf{e}^z - \frac{1}{18}\ln|u| + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\mathbf{e}^z + \frac{4\sin(8z)}{1 + 9\cos(8z)}\, dz} = \mathbf{e}^z - \frac{1}{18}\ln|1 + 9\cos(8z)| + c} $$

**6.**
$\displaystyle \int{20\mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}\sqrt{1 + \mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}} + 7w^3 - 6\sqrt[3]{w}\, dw}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{20\mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}\sqrt{1 + \mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}} + 7w^3 - 6\sqrt[3]{w}\, dw} = \int{20\mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}\sqrt{1 + \mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}}\, dw} + \int{7w^3 - 6\sqrt[3]{w}\, dw} $$

$$ u = 1 + \mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w} \quad du = \left(-8\mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}\right)dw \quad \rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{8}du = \left(\mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}\right)dw $$

$$ \int{20\mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}\sqrt{1 + \mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}} + 7w^3 - 6\sqrt[3]{w}\, dw} = -\frac{20}{8}\int{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} + \int{7w^3 - 6w^{\frac{1}{3}}\, dw} $$

$$ \int{20\mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}\sqrt{1 + \mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}} + 7w^3 - 6\sqrt[3]{w}\, dw} = -\frac{5}{2}\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)u^{\frac{3}{2}} + 7\left(\frac{1}{4}\right)w^4 - 6\left(\frac{3}{4}\right)w^{\frac{4}{3}} + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{20\mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}\sqrt{1 + \mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}} + 7w^3 - 6\sqrt[3]{w}\, dw} = -\frac{5}{3}\left(1 + \mathbf{e}^{2 - 8w}\right)^{\frac{3}{2}} + \frac{7}{4}w^4 - \frac{9}{2}w^{\frac{4}{3}} + c} $$

**7.** $\displaystyle \int{(4 + 7t)^3 - 9t\sqrt[4]{5t^2 + 3}\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{(4 + 7t)^3 - 9t\sqrt[4]{5t^2 + 3}\, dt} = \int{(4 + 7t)^3\, dt} - \int{9t\sqrt[4]{5t^2 + 3}\, dt} $$

$$ u = 4 + 7t \quad du = (7)dt \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{7}du = dt $$

$$ v = 5t^2 + 3 \quad dv = \left(10t\right)dt \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{10}dv = (t)dt $$

$$ \int{(4 + 7t)^3 - 9t\sqrt[4]{5t^2 + 3}\, dt} = \frac{1}{7}\int{u^3\, du} - \frac{9}{10}\int{v^{\frac{1}{4}}\, dv}$$

$$ \int{(4 + 7t)^3 - 9t\sqrt[4]{5t^2 + 3}\, dt} = \frac{1}{7}\left(\frac{1}{4}\right)u^4 - \frac{9}{10}\left(\frac{4}{5}\right)v^{\frac{5}{4}} + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{(4 + 7t)^3 - 9t\sqrt[4]{5t^2 + 3}\, dt} = \frac{1}{28}(4 + 7t)^4 - \frac{18}{25}\left(5t^2 + 3\right)^{\frac{5}{4}} + c} $$

**8.**
$\displaystyle \int{\frac{6x - x^2}{x^3 - 9x^2 + 8} - \csc^2\left(\frac{3x}{2}\right)\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{\frac{6x - x^2}{x^3 - 9x^2 + 8} - \csc^2\left(\frac{3x}{2}\right)\, dx} = \int{\frac{6x - x^2}{x^3 - 9x^2 + 8}\, dx} - \int{\csc^2\left(\frac{3x}{2}\right)\, dx} $$

$$ u = x^3 - 9x^2 + 8 \quad du = \left(3x^2 - 18x\right)dx $$

$$ \left(3x^2 - 18x\right)dx = -3\left(6x - x^2\right)dx $$

$$ \quad \rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{3}du = \left(6x - x^2\right)dx $$

$$ v = \frac{3x}{2} \quad dv = \left(\frac{3}{2}\right)dx \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{2}{3}dv = dx $$

$$ \int{\frac{6x - x^2}{x^3 - 9x^2 + 8} - \csc^2\left(\frac{3x}{2}\right)\, dx} = -\frac{1}{3}\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} - \frac{2}{3}\int{\csc^2(v)\, dv} $$

$$ \int{\frac{6x - x^2}{x^3 - 9x^2 + 8} - \csc^2\left(\frac{3x}{2}\right)\, dx} = -\frac{1}{3}\ln|u| + \frac{2}{3}\cot(v) + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{6x - x^2}{x^3 - 9x^2 + 8} - \csc^2\left(\frac{3x}{2}\right)\, dx} = -\frac{1}{3}\ln|x^3 - 9x^2 + 8| + \frac{2}{3}\cot\left(\frac{3x}{2}\right) + c} $$

**9.**
$\displaystyle \int{7(3y + 2)\left(4y + 3y^2\right)^3 + \sin(3 + 8y)\, dy}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{7(3y + 2)\left(4y + 3y^2\right)^3 + \sin(3 + 8y)\, dy} = \int{7(3y + 2)\left(4y + 3y^2\right)^3\, dy} + \int{\sin(3 + 8y)\, dy} $$

$$ u = 4y + 3y^2 \quad du = (4 + 6y)dy = 2(3y + 2)dy \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{2}du = (3y + 2)dy $$

$$ v = 3 + 8y \quad dv = (8)dy \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{8}dv = dy $$

$$ \int{7(3y + 2)\left(4y + 3y^2\right)^3 + \sin(3 + 8y)\, dy} = \frac{7}{2}\int{u^3\, du} + \frac{1}{8}\int{\sin(v)\, dv} $$

$$ \int{7(3y + 2)\left(4y + 3y^2\right)^3 + \sin(3 + 8y)\, dy} = \frac{7}{2}\left(\frac{1}{4}\right)u^4 - \frac{1}{8}\cos(v) + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{7(3y + 2)\left(4y + 3y^2\right)^3 + \sin(3 + 8y)\, dy} = \frac{7}{8}\left(4y + 3y^2\right)^4 - \frac{1}{8}\cos(3 + 8y) + c} $$

**10.**
$\displaystyle \int{\sec^2(2t)\left[9 + 7\tan(2t) - \tan^2(2t)\right]\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ u = \tan(2t) \quad du = \left(2\sec^2(2t)\right)dt \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{2}du = \left(\sec^2(2t)\right)dt $$

$$ \int{\sec^2(2t)\left[9 + 7\tan(2t) - \tan^2(2t)\right]\, dt} = \frac{1}{2}\int{9 + 7u - u^2\, du} $$

$$ \int{\sec^2(2t)\left[9 + 7\tan(2t) - \tan^2(2t)\right]\, dt} = \frac{1}{2}\left[9u + \frac{7}{2}u^2 - \frac{1}{3}u^3\right] + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\sec^2(2t)\left[9 + 7\tan(2t) - \tan^2(2t)\right]\, dt} = \frac{1}{2}\left[9\tan(2t) + \frac{7}{2}\tan^2(2t) - \frac{1}{3}\tan^3(2t)\right] + c} $$

**11.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{8 - w}{4w^2 + 9}\, dw}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{\frac{8 - w}{4w^2 + 9}\, dw} = \int{\frac{8}{4w^2 + 9}\, dw} - \int{\frac{w}{4w^2 + 9}\, dw} $$

$$ u = 4w^2 + 9 \quad du = (8w)dw \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{8}du = (w)dw $$

$$ \int{\frac{8 - w}{4w^2 + 9}\, dw} = \int{\frac{8}{4w^2 + 9}\, dw} - \frac{1}{8}\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \frac{8}{4w^2 + 9} = \frac{8}{9}\left(\frac{1}{\frac{4}{9}w^2 + 1}\right) = \frac{8}{9}\left(\frac{1}{\left(\frac{2w}{3}\right)^2 + 1}\right) $$

$$ v = \frac{2w}{3} \quad dv = \left(\frac{2}{3}\right)dw \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{3}{2}dv = dw $$

$$ \int{\frac{8 - w}{4w^2 + 9}\, dw} = \frac{8}{9}\left(\frac{3}{2}\right)\int{\frac{1}{v^2 + 1}\, dv} - \frac{1}{8}\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \int{\frac{8 - w}{4w^2 + 9}\, dw} = \frac{4}{3}\tan^{-1}(v) - \frac{1}{8}\ln|u| + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{8 - w}{4w^2 + 9}\, dw} = \frac{4}{3}\tan^{-1}\left(\frac{2w}{3}\right) - \frac{1}{8}\ln|4w^2 + 9| + c} $$

**12.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{7x + 2}{\sqrt{1 - 25x^2}}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{\frac{7x + 2}{\sqrt{1 - 25x^2}}\, dx} = \int{\frac{7x}{\sqrt{1 - 25x^2}}\, dx} + \int\frac{2}{\sqrt{1 - 25x^2}}{\, dx} $$

$$ u = 1 - 25x^2 \quad du = (-50x)dx \quad \rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{50}du = (x)dx $$

$$ \int{\frac{7x + 2}{\sqrt{1 - 25x^2}}\, dx} = -\frac{7}{50}\int{u^{-\frac{1}{2}}\, du} + \int\frac{2}{\sqrt{1 - 25x^2}}{\, dx} $$

$$ 1 - 25x^2 = 1 - (5x)^2 $$

$$ v = 5x \quad dv = (5)dx \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{5}dv = dx $$

$$ \int{\frac{7x + 2}{\sqrt{1 - 25x^2}}\, dx} = -\frac{7}{50}\int{u^{-\frac{1}{2}}\, du} + \frac{2}{5}\int\frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - v^2}}{\, dv} $$

$$ \int{\frac{7x + 2}{\sqrt{1 - 25x^2}}\, dx} = -\frac{7}{50}(2)u^{\frac{1}{2}} + \frac{2}{5}\sin^{-1}(v) + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{7x + 2}{\sqrt{1 - 25x^2}}\, dx} = -\frac{7}{25}\left(1 - 25x^2\right)^{\frac{1}{2}} + \frac{2}{5}\sin^{-1}(5x) + c} $$

**13.** $\displaystyle \int{z^7\left(8 + 3z^4\right)^8\, dz}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 8 + 3z^4 \quad du = \left(12z^3\right)dz \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{12}du = \left(z^3\right)dz $$

$$ \int{z^7\left(8 + 3z^4\right)^8\, dz} = \int{z^4\left(8 + 3z^4\right)^8z^3\, dz} $$

$$ u = 8 + 3z^4 $$

$$ u - 8 = 3z^4 $$

$$ \frac{u - 8}{3} = z^4 $$

$$ z^4 = \frac{1}{3}(u - 8) $$

$$ \int{z^7\left(8 + 3z^4\right)^8\, dz} = \frac{1}{12}\int{\frac{1}{3}(u - 8)u^8\, du} $$

$$ \int{z^7\left(8 + 3z^4\right)^8\, dz} = \frac{1}{36}\int{(u - 8)u^8\, du} $$

$$ \int{z^7\left(8 + 3z^4\right)^8\, dz} = \frac{1}{36}\int{u^9 - 8u^8\, du} $$

$$ \int{z^7\left(8 + 3z^4\right)^8\, dz} = \frac{1}{36}\left[\frac{1}{10}u^{10} - \frac{8}{9}u^9\right] + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{z^7\left(8 + 3z^4\right)^8\, dz} = \frac{1}{36}\left[\frac{1}{10}\left(8 + 3z^4\right)^{10} - \frac{8}{9}\left(8 + 3z^4\right)^9\right] + c} $$

---

## Assignment Problems

Evaluate each of the following integrals.

**1.** $\displaystyle \int{3x\cos\left(4 - x^2\right) - 8x\sqrt{4 - x^2}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 4 - x^2  \quad du = (-2x)dx \quad -\frac{1}{2}du = (x)dx $$

$$ \int{3x\cos\left(4 - x^2\right) - 8x\sqrt{4 - x^2}\, dx} = \int{3x\cos\left(4 - x^2\right)\, dx} - \int{8x\sqrt{4 - x^2}\, dx} $$

$$ \int{3x\cos\left(4 - x^2\right) - 8x\sqrt{4 - x^2}\, dx} = -\frac{3}{2}\int{\cos(u)\, du} + \frac{8}{2}\int{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \int{3x\cos\left(4 - x^2\right) - 8x\sqrt{4 - x^2}\, dx} = -\frac{3}{2}\sin(u) + 4\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)u^{\frac{3}{2}} + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{3x\cos\left(4 - x^2\right) - 8x\sqrt{4 - x^2}\, dx} = -\frac{3}{2}\sin\left(4 - x^2\right) + \frac{8}{3}\left(4 - x^2\right)^{\frac{3}{2}} + c} $$

**2.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{4}{(9 + 6t)^5} + \frac{13}{9 + 6t}\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 9 + 6t \quad du = (6)dt \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{6}du = dt $$

$$ \int{\frac{4}{(9 + 6t)^5} + \frac{13}{9 + 6t}\, dt} = \int{\frac{4}{(9 + 6t)^5}\, dt} + \int{\frac{13}{9 + 6t}\, dt}  $$

$$ \int{\frac{4}{(9 + 6t)^5} + \frac{13}{9 + 6t}\, dt} = \frac{4}{6}\int{u^{-5}\, dt} + \frac{13}{6}\int{\frac{1}{u}\, dt}  $$

$$ \int{\frac{4}{(9 + 6t)^5} + \frac{13}{9 + 6t}\, dt} = \frac{2}{3}\left(-\frac{1}{4}\right)u^{-4} + \frac{13}{6}\ln|u| + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{4}{(9 + 6t)^5} + \frac{13}{9 + 6t}\, dt} = -\frac{1}{6}(9 + 6t)^{-4} + \frac{13}{6}\ln|9 + 6t| + c} $$

**3.**
$\displaystyle \int{(6 - 5w)\mathbf{e}^{12w - 5w^2} + (20w - 24)\sec^2\left(12w - 5w^2\right)\, dw}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{(6 - 5w)\mathbf{e}^{12w - 5w^2} + (20w - 24)\sec^2\left(12w - 5w^2\right)\, dw} = \int{(6 - 5w)\mathbf{e}^{12w - 5w^2} - 4(6 - 5w)\sec^2\left(12w - 5w^2\right)\, dw} $$

$$ \int{(6 - 5w)\mathbf{e}^{12w - 5w^2} + (20w - 24)\sec^2\left(12w - 5w^2\right)\, dw} = \int{(6 - 5w)\mathbf{e}^{12w - 5w^2}\, dw} - 4\int{(6 - 5w)\sec^2\left(12w - 5w^2\right)\, dw} $$

$$ u = 12w - 5w^2 \quad du = (12 - 10w)dw = 2(6 - 5w)dw \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{2}du = (6 - 5w)dw $$

$$ \int{(6 - 5w)\mathbf{e}^{12w - 5w^2} + (20w - 24)\sec^2\left(12w - 5w^2\right)\, dw} = \frac{1}{2}\int{\mathbf{e}^u\, du} - 4\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)\int{\sec^2(u)\, du} $$

$$ \int{(6 - 5w)\mathbf{e}^{12w - 5w^2} + (20w - 24)\sec^2\left(12w - 5w^2\right)\, dw} = \frac{1}{2}\mathbf{e}^u - 2\tan(u) + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{(6 - 5w)\mathbf{e}^{12w - 5w^2} + (20w - 24)\sec^2\left(12w - 5w^2\right)\, dw} = \frac{1}{2}\mathbf{e}^{12w - 5w^2} - 2\tan\left(12w - 5w^2\right) + c} $$

**4.**
$\displaystyle \int{\frac{\sin\left(1 + \ln(2x)\right) - \sqrt{1 + \ln(2x)}}{x}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{\frac{\sin\left(1 + \ln(2x)\right) - \sqrt{1 + \ln(2x)}}{x}\, dx} = \int{\frac{\sin\left(1 + \ln(2x)\right)}{x}\, dx} - \int{\frac{\sqrt{1 + \ln(2x)}}{x}\, dx} $$

$$ u = 1 + \ln(2x) \quad du = \left(\frac{1}{x}\right)dx $$

$$ \int{\frac{\sin\left(1 + \ln(2x)\right) - \sqrt{1 + \ln(2x)}}{x}\, dx} = \int{\sin(u)\, du} - \int{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du}$$

$$ \int{\frac{\sin\left(1 + \ln(2x)\right) - \sqrt{1 + \ln(2x)}}{x}\, dx} = -\cos(u) - \frac{2}{3}u^{\frac{3}{2}} + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{\sin\left(1 + \ln(2x)\right) - \sqrt{1 + \ln(2x)}}{x}\, dx} = -\cos\left(1 + \ln(2x)\right) - \frac{2}{3}\left(1 + \ln(2x)\right)^{\frac{3}{2}} + c} $$

**5.**
$\displaystyle \int{17\left(x\mathbf{e}^x + \mathbf{e}^x\right)\sin\left(x\mathbf{e}^x\right) - 14\sin(x)\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{17\left(x\mathbf{e}^x + \mathbf{e}^x\right)\sin\left(x\mathbf{e}^x\right) - 14\sin(x)\, dx} = \int{17\left(x\mathbf{e}^x + \mathbf{e}^x\right)\sin\left(x\mathbf{e}^x\right)\, dx} - \int{14\sin(x)\, dx}  $$

$$ u = x\mathbf{e}^x \quad du = \left(\mathbf{e}^x + x\mathbf{e}^x\right)dx = \left(x\mathbf{e}^x + \mathbf{e}^x\right)dx $$

$$ \int{17\left(x\mathbf{e}^x + \mathbf{e}^x\right)\sin\left(x\mathbf{e}^x\right) - 14\sin(x)\, dx} = 17\int{\sin(u)\, du} - 14\int{\sin(x)\, dx} $$

$$ \int{17\left(x\mathbf{e}^x + \mathbf{e}^x\right)\sin\left(x\mathbf{e}^x\right) - 14\sin(x)\, dx} = -17\cos(u) + 14\cos(x) + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{17\left(x\mathbf{e}^x + \mathbf{e}^x\right)\sin\left(x\mathbf{e}^x\right) - 14\sin(x)\, dx} = -17\cos\left(x\mathbf{e}^x\right) + 14\cos(x) + c} $$

**6.**
$\displaystyle \int{\frac{1}{3t} + \sec(9t)\tan(9t)\mathbf{e}^{\sec(9t)}\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{\frac{1}{3t} + \sec(9t)\tan(9t)\mathbf{e}^{\sec(9t)}\, dt} = \frac{1}{3}\int{\frac{1}{t}\, dt} + \int{\sec(9t)\tan(9t)\mathbf{e}^{\sec(9t)}\, dt} $$

$$ u = \sec(9t) \quad du = \left(9\sec(9t)\tan(9t)\right)dt \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{9}du = \left(\sec(9t)\tan(9t)\right)dt $$

$$ \int{\frac{1}{3t} + \sec(9t)\tan(9t)\mathbf{e}^{\sec(9t)}\, dt} = \frac{1}{3}\int{\frac{1}{t}\, dt} + \frac{1}{9}\int{\mathbf{e}^{u}\, du} $$

$$ \int{\frac{1}{3t} + \sec(9t)\tan(9t)\mathbf{e}^{\sec(9t)}\, dt} = \frac{1}{3}\ln|t| + \frac{1}{9}\mathbf{e}^u + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{1}{3t} + \sec(9t)\tan(9t)\mathbf{e}^{\sec(9t)}\, dt} = \frac{1}{3}\ln|t| + \frac{1}{9}\mathbf{e}^{\sec(9t)} + c} $$

**7.**
$\displaystyle \int{8w^2 + \frac{\sin(w) + \cos(w)}{\sin(w) - \cos(w)}\, dw}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{8w^2 + \frac{\sin(w) + \cos(w)}{\sin(w) - \cos(w)}\, dw} = \int{8w^2\, dw} + \int{\frac{\sin(w) + \cos(w)}{\sin(w) - \cos(w)}\, dw} $$

$$ u = \sin(w) - \cos(w) \quad du = \left(\cos(w) + \sin(w)\right)dw = \left(\sin(w) + \cos(w)\right)dw $$

$$ \int{8w^2 + \frac{\sin(w) + \cos(w)}{\sin(w) - \cos(w)}\, dw} = 8\int{w^2\, dw} + \int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \int{8w^2 + \frac{\sin(w) + \cos(w)}{\sin(w) - \cos(w)}\, dw} = 8\left(\frac{1}{3}\right)w^3 + \ln|u| + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{8w^2 + \frac{\sin(w) + \cos(w)}{\sin(w) - \cos(w)}\, dw} = \frac{8}{3}w^3 + \ln|\sin(w) - \cos(w)| + c} $$

**8.**
$\displaystyle \int{8 + \left(3 + x^6\right)\cos\left(21x + x^7\right) + 9x^2 - 4\sqrt{x}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 21x + x^7 \quad du = \left(21 + 7x^6\right)dx = 7\left(3 + x^6\right)dx \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{7}du = \left(3 + x^6\right)dx $$

$$ \int{8 + \left(3 + x^6\right)\cos\left(21x + x^7\right) + 9x^2 - 4\sqrt{x}\, dx} = \int{8\, dx} + \frac{1}{7}\int{\cos(u)\, du} + 9\int{x^2\, dx} - 4\int{x^{\frac{1}{2}}\, dx} $$

$$ \int{8 + \left(3 + x^6\right)\cos\left(21x + x^7\right) + 9x^2 - 4\sqrt{x}\, dx} = 8x + \frac{1}{7}\sin(u) + 9\left(\frac{1}{3}\right)x^3 - 4\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)x^{\frac{3}{2}} + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{8 + \left(3 + x^6\right)\cos\left(21x + x^7\right) + 9x^2 - 4\sqrt{x}\, dx} = 8x + \frac{1}{7}\sin\left(21x + x^7\right) + 3x^3 - \frac{8}{3}x^{\frac{3}{2}} + c} $$

**9.**
$\displaystyle \int{\sin(y)\cos(y)\sqrt{3 + \sin^2(y)} + 5\mathbf{e}^y\, dy}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 3 + \sin^2(y) \quad du = (2\sin(y)\cos(y))dy \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{2}du = (\sin(y)\cos(y))dy $$

$$ \int{\sin(y)\cos(y)\sqrt{3 + \sin^2(y)} + 5\mathbf{e}^y\, dy} = \frac{1}{2}\int{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} + 5\int{\mathbf{e}^y\, dy} $$

$$ \int{\sin(y)\cos(y)\sqrt{3 + \sin^2(y)} + 5\mathbf{e}^y\, dy} = \frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)u^{\frac{3}{2}} + 5\mathbf{e}^y + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\sin(y)\cos(y)\sqrt{3 + \sin^2(y)} + 5\mathbf{e}^y\, dy} = \frac{1}{3}\left(3 + \sin^2(y)\right)^{\frac{3}{2}} + 5\mathbf{e}^y + c} $$

**10.** $\displaystyle \int{\sin(2 - t) + 8\cos(5t) - \mathbf{e}^{3t}\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 2 - t \quad du = (-1)dt \quad \rightarrow \quad -du = dt $$

$$ v = 5t \quad dv = (5)dt \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{5}dv = dt $$

$$ w = 3t \quad dw = (3)dt \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{3}dw = dt $$

$$ \int{\sin(2 - t) + 8\cos(5t) - \mathbf{e}^{3t}\, dt} = -\int{\sin(u)\, du} + 8\left(\frac{1}{5}\right)\int{\cos(v)\, dv} - \frac{1}{3}\int{\mathbf{e}^w\, dw} $$

$$ \int{\sin(2 - t) + 8\cos(5t) - \mathbf{e}^{3t}\, dt} = \cos(u) + \frac{8}{5}\sin(v) - \frac{1}{3}\mathbf{e}^w + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\sin(2 - t) + 8\cos(5t) - \mathbf{e}^{3t}\, dt} = \cos(2 - t) + \frac{8}{5}\sin(5t) - \frac{1}{3}\mathbf{e}^{3t} + c} $$

**11.**
$\displaystyle \int{\frac{4x^2 - 1}{\sqrt[4]{6x - 8x^3}} + 9x\mathbf{e}^{x^2}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 6x - 8x^3 \quad du = \left(6 - 24x^2\right)dx = -6\left(4x^2 - 1\right)dx \quad \rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{6}du = \left(4x^2 - 1\right)dx $$

$$ v = \mathbf{e}^{x^2} \quad dv = \left(2x\mathbf{e}^{x^2}\right)dx \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{2}dv = \left(x\mathbf{e}^{x^2}\right)dx $$

$$ \int{\frac{4x^2 - 1}{\sqrt[4]{6x - 8x^3}} + 9x\mathbf{e}^{x^2}\, dx} = -\frac{1}{6}\int{u^{-\frac{1}{4}}\, du} + 9\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)\int{(1)\, dv} $$

$$ \int{\frac{4x^2 - 1}{\sqrt[4]{6x - 8x^3}} + 9x\mathbf{e}^{x^2}\, dx} = -\frac{1}{6}\left(\frac{4}{3}\right)u^{\frac{3}{4}} + \frac{9}{2}v + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{4x^2 - 1}{\sqrt[4]{6x - 8x^3}} + 9x\mathbf{e}^{x^2}\, dx} = -\frac{2}{9}\left(6x - 8x^3\right)^{\frac{3}{4}} + \frac{9}{2}\mathbf{e}^{x^2} + c} $$

**12.** $\displaystyle \int{z^3 + \sqrt{4 - 3z} - 4\sec(8z)\tan(8z)\, dz}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 4 - 3z \quad du = (-3)dz \quad \rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{3}du = dz $$

$$ v = \sec(8z) \quad dv = (8\sec(8z)\tan(8z))dz \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{8}dv = (\sec(8z)\tan(8z))dz $$

$$ \int{z^3 + \sqrt{4 - 3z} - 4\sec(8z)\tan(8z)\, dz} = \int{z^3\, dz} - \frac{1}{3}\int{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} - 4\left(\frac{1}{8}\right)\int{(1)\, dv}  $$

$$ \int{z^3 + \sqrt{4 - 3z} - 4\sec(8z)\tan(8z)\, dz} = \frac{1}{4}z^4- \frac{1}{3}\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)u^{\frac{3}{2}} - \frac{1}{2}v + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{z^3 + \sqrt{4 - 3z} - 4\sec(8z)\tan(8z)\, dz} = \frac{1}{4}z^4- \frac{2}{9}(4 - 3z)^{\frac{3}{2}} - \frac{1}{2}(\sec(8z)) + c} $$

**13.**
$\displaystyle \int{\frac{17}{6 - w} + \sin(w)\sin\left[1 + \cos(w)\right]\, dw}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 6 - w \quad du = -dw \quad \rightarrow \quad -du = dw $$

$$ v = 1 + \cos(w) \quad dv = (-\sin(w))dw \quad \rightarrow \quad -dv = (\sin(w))dw $$

$$ \int{\frac{17}{6 - w} + \sin(w)\sin\left[1 + \cos(w)\right]\, dw} = -17\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} - \int{\sin(v)\, dv}$$

$$ \int{\frac{17}{6 - w} + \sin(w)\sin\left[1 + \cos(w)\right]\, dw} = -17\ln|u| + \cos(v) + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{17}{6 - w} + \sin(w)\sin\left[1 + \cos(w)\right]\, dw} = -17\ln|6 - w| + \cos(1 + \cos(w)) + c} $$

**14.**
$\displaystyle \int{\frac{\sqrt{1 + 2\ln(7x)}}{x} + \frac{10x^3}{x^4 + 9}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 1 + 2\ln(7x) \quad du = \left(\frac{2(7)}{7x}\right)dx = \left(\frac{2}{x}\right)dx \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{2}du = \left(\frac{1}{x}\right)dx $$

$$ v = x^4 + 9 \quad dv = \left(4x^3\right)dx \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{4}dv = \left(x^3\right)dx $$

$$ \int{\frac{\sqrt{1 + 2\ln(7x)}}{x} + \frac{10x^3}{x^4 + 9}\, dx} = \frac{1}{2}\int{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} + \frac{10}{4}\int{\frac{1}{v}\, dv} + c $$

$$ \int{\frac{\sqrt{1 + 2\ln(7x)}}{x} + \frac{10x^3}{x^4 + 9}\, dx} = \frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)u^{\frac{3}{2}} + \frac{5}{2}\ln|v| + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{\sqrt{1 + 2\ln(7x)}}{x} + \frac{10x^3}{x^4 + 9}\, dx} = \frac{1}{3}\left(1 + 2\ln(7x)\right)^{\frac{3}{2}} + \frac{5}{2}\ln|x^4 + 9| + c} $$

**15.**
$\displaystyle \int{x\sin\left(x^2\right)\left[\cos^4\left(x^2\right) + 8\cos^2\left(x^2\right) - 10\right]\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ u = \cos(x^2) \quad du = (-2x\sin(x^2))dx \quad \rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{2}du = \left(x\sin\left(x^2\right)\right)dx $$

$$ \int{x\sin\left(x^2\right)\left[\cos^4\left(x^2\right) + 8\cos^2\left(x^2\right) - 10\right]\, dx} = -\frac{1}{2}\int{u^4 + 8u^2 - 10\, du} $$

$$ \int{x\sin\left(x^2\right)\left[\cos^4\left(x^2\right) + 8\cos^2\left(x^2\right) - 10\right]\, dx} = -\frac{1}{2}\int{u^4\, du} - 4\int{u^2\, du} + 5\int{(1)\, du}$$

$$ \int{x\sin\left(x^2\right)\left[\cos^4\left(x^2\right) + 8\cos^2\left(x^2\right) - 10\right]\, dx} = -\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{1}{5}\right)u^5 - 4\left(\frac{1}{3}\right)u^3 + 5u + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{x\sin\left(x^2\right)\left[\cos^4\left(x^2\right) + 8\cos^2\left(x^2\right) - 10\right]\, dx} = -\frac{1}{10}\cos^5(x^2) - \frac{4}{3}\cos^3(x^2) + 5\cos(x^2) + c} $$

**16.**
$\displaystyle \int{\csc\left(\frac{t}{2}\right)\cot\left(\frac{t}{2}\right)\left[\csc^6\left(\frac{t}{2}\right) + 3\csc^4\left(\frac{t}{2}\right) - 8\csc\left(\frac{t}{2}\right)\right]\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ u = \csc\left(\frac{t}{2}\right) \quad du = \left(-\frac{1}{2}\csc\left(\frac{t}{2}\right)\cot\left(\frac{t}{2}\right)\right)dt \quad \rightarrow \quad -2du = \left(\csc\left(\frac{t}{2}\right)\cot\left(\frac{t}{2}\right)\right)dt $$

$$ \int{\csc\left(\frac{t}{2}\right)\cot\left(\frac{t}{2}\right)\left[\csc^6\left(\frac{t}{2}\right) + 3\csc^4\left(\frac{t}{2}\right) - 8\csc\left(\frac{t}{2}\right)\right]\, dt} = -2\int{u^6 + 3u^4 - 8u\, du}  $$

$$ \quad = -2\int{u^6\, du} + (-2)(3)\int{u^4\, du} - (-2)(8)\int{u\, du} $$

$$ \quad = -2\left(\frac{1}{7}\right)u^7 - 6\left(\frac{1}{5}\right)u^5 + 16\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)u^2 + c $$

$$ \boxed{\quad = -\frac{2}{7}\csc^7\left(\frac{t}{2}\right) - \frac{6}{5}\csc^5\left(\frac{t}{2}\right) + 8\csc^2\left(\frac{t}{2}\right) + c} $$

**17.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{3 + 7y}{y^2 + 3}\, dy}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{\frac{3 + 7y}{y^2 + 3}\, dy} = \int{\frac{3}{y^2 + 3}\, dy} + \int{\frac{7y}{y^2 + 3}\, dy} $$

$$ u = y^2 + 3 \quad du = (2y)dy \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{2}du = (y)dy $$

$$ \frac{3}{y^2 + 3} = \frac{3}{3}\left(\frac{1}{1 + \frac{y^2}{3}}\right) = \frac{1}{1 + \left(\frac{y}{\sqrt{3}}\right)^2} $$

$$ v = \frac{y}{\sqrt{3}} \quad dv = \left(\frac{\sqrt{3}}{(\sqrt{3})^2}\right)dy = \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}}dy \quad \rightarrow \sqrt{3}dv = dy $$

$$ \int{\frac{3 + 7y}{y^2 + 3}\, dy} = \sqrt{3}\int{\frac{1}{1 + v^2}\, dv} + \frac{7}{2}\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \int{\frac{3 + 7y}{y^2 + 3}\, dy} = \sqrt{3}\tan^{-1}(v) + \frac{7}{2}\ln|u| + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{3 + 7y}{y^2 + 3}\, dy} = \sqrt{3}\tan^{-1}\left(\frac{y}{\sqrt{3}}\right) + \frac{7}{2}\ln|y^2 + 3| + c} $$

**18.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{15z + 27}{100z^2 + 11}\, dz}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{\frac{15z + 27}{100z^2 + 11}\, dz} = \int{\frac{15z}{100z^2 + 11}\, dz} + \int{\frac{27}{100z^2 + 11}\, dz} $$

$$ u = 100z^2 + 11 \quad du = (200z)dz \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{200}du = (z)dz $$

$$ \frac{27}{100z^2 + 11} = \frac{27}{11}\left(\frac{1}{1 + \frac{100z^2}{11}}\right) = \frac{27}{11}\left(\frac{1}{1 + \left(\frac{10z}{\sqrt{11}}\right)^2}\right) $$

$$ v = \frac{10z}{\sqrt{11}} \quad dv = \left(\frac{10}{\sqrt{11}}\right)dz \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{\sqrt{11}}{10}dv = dz $$

$$ \int{\frac{15z + 27}{100z^2 + 11}\, dz} = \frac{15}{200}\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} + \frac{27}{11}\left(\frac{\sqrt{11}}{10}\right)\int{\frac{1}{1 + v^2}\, dv} $$

$$ \int{\frac{15z + 27}{100z^2 + 11}\, dz} = \frac{3}{40}\ln|u| + \frac{27\sqrt{11}}{110}\tan^{-1}(v) + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{15z + 27}{100z^2 + 11}\, dz} = \frac{3}{40}\ln|100z^2 + 11| + \frac{27\sqrt{11}}{110}\tan^{-1}\left(\frac{10z}{\sqrt{11}}\right) + c} $$

**19.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{8x + 1}{\sqrt{16 - x^2}}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{\frac{8x + 1}{\sqrt{16 - x^2}}\, dx} = \int{\frac{8x}{\sqrt{16 - x^2}}\, dx} + \int{\frac{1}{\sqrt{16 - x^2}}\, dx} $$

$$ u = 16 - x^2 \quad du = (-2x)dx \quad \rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{2}du = (x)dx $$

$$ \frac{1}{\sqrt{16 - x^2}} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{16(1 - \frac{x^2}{16})}} = \frac{1}{4\sqrt{1 - \left(\frac{x}{4}\right)^2}} = \frac{1}{4}\left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - \left(\frac{x}{4}\right)^2}}\right) $$

$$ v = \frac{x}{4} \quad dv = \left(\frac{1}{4}\right)dx \quad \rightarrow \quad 4dv = dx $$

$$ \int{\frac{8x + 1}{\sqrt{16 - x^2}}\, dx} = -\frac{8}{2}\int{u^{-\frac{1}{2}}\, du} + 4\left(\frac{1}{4}\right)\int{\frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - v^2}}\, dv} $$

$$ \int{\frac{8x + 1}{\sqrt{16 - x^2}}\, dx} = -4(2)u^{\frac{1}{2}} + \sin^{-1}(v) + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{8x + 1}{\sqrt{16 - x^2}}\, dx} = -8\left(16 - x^2\right)^{\frac{1}{2}} + \sin^{-1}\left(\frac{x}{4}\right) + c} $$

**20.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{2 - w}{\sqrt{25 - 2w^2}}\, dw}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{\frac{2 - w}{\sqrt{25 - 2w^2}}\, dw} = \int{\frac{2}{\sqrt{25 - 2w^2}}\, dw} - \int{\frac{w}{\sqrt{25 - 2w^2}}\, dw} $$

$$ u = 25 - 2w^2 \quad du = (-4w)dw \quad \rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{4}du = (w)dw $$

$$ \frac{2}{\sqrt{25 - 2w^2}} = \frac{2}{1}\left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{25\left(1 - \frac{2w^2}{25}\right)}}\right) = \frac{2}{5}\left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - \left(\frac{w\sqrt{2}}{5}\right)^2}}\right) $$

$$ v = \frac{w\sqrt{2}}{5} \quad dv = \left(\frac{\sqrt{2}}{5}\right)dw \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{5}{\sqrt{2}}dv = dw $$

$$ \int{\frac{2 - w}{\sqrt{25 - 2w^2}}\, dw} = \left(\frac{2}{5}\right)\frac{5}{\sqrt{2}}\int{\frac{1}{\sqrt{1 - v^2}}\, dv} - \left(-\frac{1}{4}\right)\int{u^{-\frac{1}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \sqrt{2}\sin^{-1}(v) + \frac{1}{2}u^{\frac{1}{2}} + c $$

$$ \boxed{\quad = \sqrt{2}\sin^{-1}\left(\frac{w\sqrt{2}}{5}\right) + \frac{1}{2}\left(25 - 2w^2\right)^{\frac{1}{2}} + c} $$

**21.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{9z^5}{2 + 3z^3}\, dz}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 2 + 3z^3 \quad du = (9z^2)dz $$

$$ u = 2 + 3z^3 $$

$$ u - 2 = 3z^3 $$

$$ \frac{u - 2}{3} = z^3 $$

$$ z^3 = \frac{1}{3}(u - 2) $$

$$ \int{\frac{9z^5}{2 + 3z^3}\, dz} = \int{\frac{u - 2}{3u}\, du} $$

$$ \int{\frac{9z^5}{2 + 3z^3}\, dz} = \int{\frac{u}{3u}\, du} - \int{\frac{2}{3u}\, du}$$

$$ \int{\frac{9z^5}{2 + 3z^3}\, dz} = \int{\frac{1}{3}\, du} - \int{\frac{2}{3u}\, du}$$

$$ \int{\frac{9z^5}{2 + 3z^3}\, dz} = \int{\frac{1}{3}\, du} - \int{\frac{2}{3}\left(\frac{1}{u}\right)\, du}$$

$$ \int{\frac{9z^5}{2 + 3z^3}\, dz} = \frac{1}{3}u - \frac{2}{3}\ln|u| + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{9z^5}{2 + 3z^3}\, dz} = \frac{1}{3}\left(2 + 3z^3\right) - \frac{2}{3}\ln|2 + 3z^3| + c} $$

**22.** $\displaystyle \int{4t^{15}\sqrt{1 - t^8}\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 1 - t^8 \quad du = \left(-8t^7\right)dt = -2\left(4t^7\right)dt $$

$$ u = 1 - t^8 $$

$$ u - 1 = -t^8 $$

$$ 1 - u = t^8 $$

$$ \int{4t^{15}\sqrt{1 - t^8}\, dt} = -2\int{(1 - u)u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \int{4t^{15}\sqrt{1 - t^8}\, dt} = -2\int{u^{\frac{1}{2}} - u^{\frac{3}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \int{4t^{15}\sqrt{1 - t^8}\, dt} = -2\left[\int{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} - \int{u^{\frac{3}{2}}\, du}\right] $$

$$ \int{4t^{15}\sqrt{1 - t^8}\, dt} = -2\left[\frac{2}{3}u^{\frac{3}{2}}- \frac{2}{5}u^{\frac{5}{2}}\right] + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{4t^{15}\sqrt{1 - t^8}\, dt} = -2\left[\frac{2}{3}\left(1 - t^8\right)^{\frac{3}{2}}- \frac{2}{5}\left(1 - t^8\right)^{\frac{5}{2}}\right] + c} $$

**23.** $\displaystyle \int{\cot(x)\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{\cot(x)\, dx} = \int{\frac{1}{\tan(x)}\, dx} = \int{\frac{\cos(x)}{\sin(x)}\, dx} $$

$$ u = \sin(x) \quad du = (\cos(x))dx $$

$$ \int{\cot(x)\, dx} = \int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \int{\cot(x)\, dx} = \ln|u| + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\cot(x)\, dx} = \ln|\sin(x)| + c} $$

**24.** $\displaystyle \int{\csc(x)\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \int{\csc(x)\, dx} = \int{\frac{1}{\sin(x)}\, dx} $$

This won't work, because as we saw in 23, the derivative of $\sin(x)$ yields
$\cos(x)$, which doesn't help us remove or simplify the numerator of $1$. Thusly
we have to do something fancy:

$$ \int{\csc(x)\, dx} = \int{\frac{\csc(x)\left[\csc(x) + \cot(x)\right]}{\csc(x) + \cot(x)}\, dx} $$

Now use the denominator for a substitution:

$$ u = \csc(x) + \cot(x) \quad du = \left[-\csc(x)\cot(x) - \csc^2(x)\right]dx = -\csc(x)\left[\cot(x) + \csc(x)\right]dx \quad \rightarrow \quad -du = \csc(x)\left[\cot(x) + \csc(x)\right] $$

And now as you can see, we can express our integral with the substitution:

$$ \int{\csc(x)\, dx} = -\int{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \int{\csc(x)\, dx} = -\ln|u| + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\csc(x)\, dx} = -\ln|\csc(x) + \cot(x)| + c} $$

**25.** $\displaystyle \int{\frac{x}{1 + x^4}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \frac{x}{1 + x^4} = \frac{x}{1}\left(\frac{1}{1 + x^4}\right) = \frac{x}{1}\left(\frac{1}{1 + \left(x^2\right)^2}\right) $$

$$ v = x^2 \quad dv = (2x)dx \quad \rightarrow \frac{1}{2}dv = (x)dx $$

$$ \int{\frac{x}{1 + x^4}\, dx} = \frac{1}{2}\int\frac{1}{1 + v^2}{\, dv} $$

$$ \int{\frac{x}{1 + x^4}\, dx} = \frac{1}{2}\tan^{-1}(v) + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\frac{x}{1 + x^4}\, dx} = \frac{1}{2}\tan^{-1}\left(x^2\right) + c} $$

**26.**
$\displaystyle \int{\mathbf{e}^{8t}\left(4 + \mathbf{e}^{4t}\right)^{-3}\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 4 + \mathbf{e}^{4t} \quad du = \left(4\mathbf{e}^{4t}\right)dt \quad \rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{4}du = \left(\mathbf{e}^{4t}\right)dt $$

$$ u = 4 + \mathbf{e}^{4t} $$

$$ u - 4 = \mathbf{e}^{4t} $$

$$ \int{\mathbf{e}^{8t}\left(4 + \mathbf{e}^{4t}\right)^{-3}\, dt} = \frac{1}{4}\int{(u - 4)u^{-3}\, du} $$

$$ \int{\mathbf{e}^{8t}\left(4 + \mathbf{e}^{4t}\right)^{-3}\, dt} = \frac{1}{4}\int{u^{-2} - 4u^{-3}\, du} $$

$$ \int{\mathbf{e}^{8t}\left(4 + \mathbf{e}^{4t}\right)^{-3}\, dt} = \frac{1}{4}\left[\int{u^{-2}\, du} - 4\int{u^{-3}\, du}\right] $$

$$ \int{\mathbf{e}^{8t}\left(4 + \mathbf{e}^{4t}\right)^{-3}\, dt} = \frac{1}{4}\left[-u^{-1} - 4\left(-\frac{1}{4}\right)u^{-4}\right] + c $$

$$ \int{\mathbf{e}^{8t}\left(4 + \mathbf{e}^{4t}\right)^{-3}\, dt} = \frac{1}{4}\left[-u^{-1} + u^{-4}\right] + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{\mathbf{e}^{8t}\left(4 + \mathbf{e}^{4t}\right)^{-3}\, dt} = \frac{1}{4}\left[-\left(4 + \mathbf{e}^{4t}\right)^{-1} + \left(4 + \mathbf{e}^{4t}\right)^{-4}\right] + c} $$

**27.** $\displaystyle \int{x^8\sqrt{2 - x^3}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 2 - x^3 \quad du = \left(-3x^2\right)dx \quad \rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{3}du = \left(x^2\right)dx $$

$$ u = 2 - x^3 $$

$$ u - 2 = -x^3 $$

$$ 2 - u = x^3 $$

$$ \int{x^8\sqrt{2 - x^3}\, dx} = -\frac{1}{3}\int{(2 - u)^2u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \int{x^8\sqrt{2 - x^3}\, dx} = -\frac{1}{3}\int{(2 - u)(2 - u)u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \int{x^8\sqrt{2 - x^3}\, dx} = -\frac{1}{3}\int{\left(4 - 4u + u^2\right)u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \int{x^8\sqrt{2 - x^3}\, dx} = -\frac{1}{3}\int{4u^{\frac{1}{2}} - 4u^{\frac{3}{2}} + u^{\frac{5}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \int{x^8\sqrt{2 - x^3}\, dx} = -\frac{1}{3}\left[4\int{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} - 4\int{u^{\frac{3}{2}}\, du} + \int{u^{\frac{5}{2}}\, du}\right] $$

$$ \int{x^8\sqrt{2 - x^3}\, dx} = -\frac{1}{3}\left[4\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)u^{\frac{3}{2}} - 4\left(\frac{2}{5}\right)u^{\frac{5}{2}} + \frac{2}{7}u^{\frac{7}{2}}\right] + c $$

$$ \boxed{\int{x^8\sqrt{2 - x^3}\, dx} = -\frac{1}{3}\left[\frac{8}{3}\left(2 - x^3\right)^{\frac{3}{2}} - \frac{8}{5}\left(2 - x^3\right)^{\frac{5}{2}} + \frac{2}{7}\left(2 - x^3\right)^{\frac{7}{2}}\right] + c} $$
