# Section 5.6 : Definition Of The Definite Integral

In this section we will formally define the definite integral and give many of
the properties of definite integrals. Let's start off with the definition of a
definite integral.

**Definite Integral**

> Given a function $f(x)$ that is continuous on the interval $[a, b]$ we divide
> the interal into $n$ subintervals of equal width, $\Delta x$, and from each
> interval choose a point, $x_i^*$. Then the **definite integral of** $f(x)$
> **from** $a$ **to** $b$ is
>
> $$ \int_{a}^{b}{f(x)\, dx} = \lim\limits_{n \to \infty}\sum_{i = 1}^nf\left(x_i^*\right)\Delta x $$

The definite integral is defined to be exactly the limit and summation that we
looked at in the last section to find the net area between a function and the
$x$-axis. Also note that the notation for the definite integral is very similar
to the notation for an indefinite integral. The reason for this will be apparent
eventually.

There is also a little bit of terminology that we should get out of the way
here. The number "a" that is at the bottom of the integral sign is called the
**lower limit** of the integral and the number "b" at the top of the integral
sign is called the **upper limit** of the integral. Also, despite the fact that
$a$ and $b$ were given as an interval the lower limit does not necessarily need
to be smaller than the upper limit. Collectively we'll often call $a$ and $b$
the interval of integration.

Let's work a quick example. This example will use many of the properties and
facts from the brief review of
[**summation notation**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/SummationNotation.aspx)
in the Extras chapter.

---

**Example 1** Using the definition of the definite integral compute the
following.

$$ \int_{0}^{2}{x^2 + 1\, dx} $$

**Solution**

First, we can't actually use the definition unless we determine which points in
each interval that well use for $x_i^*$. In order to make our life easier we'll
use the right endpoints of each interval.

From the previous section we know that for a general $n$ the width of each
subinterval is,

$$ \Delta x = \frac{2 - 0}{n} = \frac{2}{n} $$

The subintervals are then,

$$ \left[0, \frac{2}{n}\right], \left[\frac{2}{n}, \frac{4}{n}\right], \left[\frac{4}{n}, \frac{6}{n}\right], \dots , \left[\frac{2(i - 1)}{n}, \frac{2i}{n}\right], \dots , \left[\frac{2(n - 1)}{n}, 2\right] $$

As we can see the right endpoint of the $i$<sup>_th_</sup> subinterval is

$$ x_i^* = \frac{2i}{n} $$

The summation in the definition of the definite integral is then,

$$ \sum_{i = 1}^{n}{f\left(x_i^*\right)\Delta x} = \sum_{i = 1}^{n}{f\left(\frac{2i}{n}\right)\left(\frac{2}{}\right)} $$

$$ \quad = \sum_{i = 1}^{n}{\left(\left(\frac{2i}{n}\right)^2 + 1\right)\left(\frac{2}{n}\right)} $$

$$ \quad = \sum_{i = 1}^{n}{\left(\frac{8i^2}{n^3} + \frac{2}{n}\right)} $$

Now, we are going to have to take a limit of this. That means that we are going
to need to "evaluate" this summation. In other words, we are going to have to
use the formulas given in the
[**summation notation**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/SummationNotation.aspx)
review to eliminate the actual summation and get a formula for this for a
general $n$.

To do this we will need to recognize that $n$ is a constant as far as the
summation notation is concerned. As we cycle through the integers from 1 to $n$
in the summation only $i$ changes and so anything that isn't an $i$ will be a
constant and can be factored out of the summation. In particular any $n$ that is
in the summation can be factored out if we need to.

Here is the summation "evaluation".

$$ \sum_{i = 1}^{n}{f\left(x_i^*\right)\Delta x} = \sum_{i = 1}^{n}{\frac{8i^2}{n^3}} + \sum_{i = 1}^{n}{\frac{2}{n}} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{8}{n^3}\sum_{i = 1}^{n}{i^2} + \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i = 1}^{n}{2} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{8}{n^3}\left(\frac{n(n + 1)(2n + 1)}{6}\right) + \frac{1}{n}(2n) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{4(n + 1)(2n + 1)}{3n^2} + 2 $$

$$ \quad = \frac{14n^2 + 12n + 4}{3n^2} $$

We can now compute the definite integral.

$$ \int_{0}^{2}{x^2 + 1\, dx} = \lim\limits_{n \to \infty}\sum_{i = 1}^{n}{f\left(x_i^*\right)\Delta x} $$

$$ \quad = \lim\limits_{n \to \infty}\frac{14n^2 + 12n + 4}{3n^2} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{14}{3} $$

We've seen several methods for dealing with the limit in this problem so we'll
leave it to you to verify the results.

---

Wow, that was a lot of work for a fairly simple function. There is a much
simpler way of evaluating these and we will get to it eventually. The main
purpose to this section is to get the main properties and facts about the
definite integral out of the way. We'll discuss how we compute these in practice
starting with the next section.

So, let's start taking a look at some of the properties of the definite
integral.

**Properties**

> 1. $\displaystyle \int_{a}^{b}{f(x)\, dx} = -\int_{b}^{a}{f(x)\, dx}$. We can
>    interchange the limits on any definite integral, all that we need to do is
>    tack a minus sign onto the integral when we do.
> 2. $\displaystyle \int_{a}^{a}{f(x)\, dx} = 0$. If the upper and lower limits
>    are the same then there is no work to do, the integral is zero.
> 3. $\displaystyle \int_{a}^{b}{cf(x)\, dx} = c\int_{a}^{b}{f(x)\, dx}$, where
>    $c$ is any number. So, as with limits, derivatives, and indefinite
>    integrals we can factor out a constant.
> 4. $\displaystyle \int_{a}^{b}{f(x) \pm g(x)\, dx} = \int_{a}^{b}{f(x)\, dx} \pm \int_{a}^{b}{g(x)\, dx}$.
>    We can break up definite integrals across a sum or difference.
> 5. $\displaystyle \int_{a}^{b}{f(x)\, dx} = \int_{a}^{c}{f(x)\, dx} + \int_{c}^{b}{f(x)\, dx}$
>    where $c$ is any number. This property is more important than we might
>    realize at first. One of the main uses of this property is to tell us how
>    we can integrate a function over the adjacent intervals, $[a, c]$ and
>    $[c, b]$. Note however that $c$ doesn't need to be between $a$ and $b$.
> 6. $\displaystyle \int_{a}^{b}{f(x)\, dx} = \int_{a}^{b}{f(t)\, dt}$. The
>    point of this property is to notice that as long as the function and limits
>    are the same the variable of integration that we use in the definite
>    integral won't affect the answer.

See the
[**Proof of Various Integral Properties**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/ProofIntProp.aspx#Extras_IntPf_Def1)
section of the Extras chapter for the proof of properties 1 - 4. Property 5 is
not easy to prove and so is not shown there. Property 6 is not really a property
in the full sense of the word. It is only here to acknowledge that as long as
the function and limits are the same it doesn't matter what letter we use for
the variable. The answer will be the same.

Let's do a couple of examples dealing with these properties.

---

**Example 2** Use the results from the first example to evaluate each of the
following.

**Discussion**

All of the solutions to these problems will rely on the fact we proved in the
first example. Namely that,

$$ \int_{0}^{2}{x^2 + 1\, dx} = \frac{14}{3} $$

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int_{2}^{0}{x^2 + 1\, dx}$

**Solution**

In this case the only difference between the two is that the limits have
interchanged. So, using the first property gives,

$$ \int_{0}^{2}{x^2 + 1\, dx} = -\int_{0}^{2}{x^2 + 1\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{14}{3} $$

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int_{0}^{2}{10x^2 + 10\, dx}$

**Solution**

For this part notice that we can factor a 10 out of both terms and then out of
the integral using the third property.

$$ \int_{0}^{2}{10x^2 + 10\, dx} = \int_{0}^{2}{10\left(x^2 + 1\right)\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = 10\int_{0}^{2}{x^2 + 1\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = 10\left(\frac{14}{3}\right) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{140}{3} $$

**\(c\)** $\displaystyle \int_{0}^{2}{t^2 + 1\, dt}$

**Solution**

In this case the only difference is the letter used and so this is just going to
use property 6.

$$ \int_{0}^{2}{t^2 + 1\, dt} = \int_{0}^{2}{x^2 + 1\, dx} = \frac{14}{3} $$

---

Here are a couple of examples using the other properties.

---

**Example 3** Evaluate the following definite integral.

$$ \int_{130}^{130}{\frac{x^3 - x\sin(x) + \cos(x)}{x^2 + 1}\, dx} $$

**Solution**

There really isn't anything to do with this integral once we notice that the
limits are the same. Using the second property this is,

$$ \int_{130}^{130}{\frac{x^3 - x\sin(x) + \cos(x)}{x^2 + 1}\, dx} = 0 $$

---

**Example 4** Given that $\displaystyle \int_{6}^{-10}{f(x)\, dx} = 23$ and
$\displaystyle \int_{-10}^{6}{g(x)\, dx} = -9$ determine the value of

$$ \int_{-10}^{6}{2f(x)\, dx} = -10g(x)\, dx $$

We will first need to use the fourth property to break up the integral and the
third property to factor out the constants.

$$ \int_{-10}^{6}{2f(x) - 10g(x)\, dx} = \int_{-10}^{6}{2f(x)\, dx} - \int_{-10}^{6}{10g(x)\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = 2\int_{-10}^{6}{f(x)\, dx} - 10\int_{-10}^{6}{g(x)\, dx} $$

Now notice that the limits on the first integral are interchanged with the
limits on the given integral so switch them using the first property above (and
adding a minus sign of course). Once this is done we can plug in the known
values of the integrals.

$$ \int_{-10}^{6}{2f(x) - 10g(x)\, dx} = -2\int_{6}^{-10}{f(x)\, dx} - 10\int_{-10}^{6}{g(x)\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = -2(23) - 10(-9) $$

$$ \quad = 44 $$

---

**Example 5** Given that $\displaystyle \int_{12}^{-10}{f(x)\, dx} = 6$,
$\displaystyle \int_{100}^{-10}{f(x)\, dx} = -2$, and
$\displaystyle \int_{100}^{-5}{f(x)\, dx} = 4$ determine the value of
$\displaystyle \int_{-5}^{12}{f(x)\, dx}$.

**Solution**

This example is mostly an example of property 5 although there are a couple of
uses of property 1 in the solution as well.

We need to figure out how to correctly break up the integral using property 5 to
allow us to use the given pieces of information. First, we'll note that there is
an integral that has a "-5" in one of the limits. It's not the lower limit, but
we can use property 1 to correct that eventually. The other limit is 100 so this
is the number $c$ that we’ll use in property 5.

$$ \int_{-5}^{12}{f(x)\, dx} = \int_{-5}^{100}{f(x)\, dx} + \int_{100}^{12}{f(x)\, dx} $$

We'll be able to get the value of the first integral, but the second still isn't
in the list of know integrals. However, we do have second integral that has a
limit of 100 in it. The other limit for this second integral is -10 and this
will be $c$ in this application of property 5.

$$ \int_{-5}^{12}{f(x)\, dx} = \int_{-5}^{100}{f(x)\, dx} + \int_{100}^{-10}{f(x)\, dx} + \int_{-10}^{12}{f(x)\, dx} $$

At this point all that we need to do is use the property 1 on the first and
third integral to get the limits to match up with the known integrals. After
that we can plug in for the known integrals.

$$ \int_{-5}^{12}{f(x)\, dx} = -\int_{100}^{-5}{f(x)\, dx} + \int_{100}^{-10}{f(x)\, dx} - \int_{12}^{-10}{f(x)\, dx} $$

$$ \quad = -4 - 2 - 6 $$

$$ \quad = -12 $$

---

There are also some nice properties that we can use in comparing the general
size of definite integrals. Here they are.

**More Properties**

> 7. $\displaystyle \int_{a}^{b}{c\, dx} = c(b - a)$, $c$ is any number.
> 8. If $f(x) \geq 0$ for $a \leq x \leq b$ then
>    $\displaystyle \int_{a}^{b}{f(x)\, dx} \geq 0$.
> 9. If $f(x) \geq g(x)$ for $a \leq x \leq b$ then
>    $\displaystyle \int_{a}^{b}{f(x)\, dx} \geq \int_{a}^{b}{g(x)\, dx}$
> 10. If $m \leq f(x) \leq M$ for $a \leq x \leq b$ then
>     $\displaystyle m(b - a) \leq \int_{a}^{b}{f(x)\, dx} \leq M(b - a)$
> 11. $\displaystyle \left| \int_{a}^{b}{f(x)\, dx}\right| \leq \int_{a}^{b}{\left| f(x) \right|\, dx}$

See the
[**Proof of Various Integral Properties**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/ProofIntProp.aspx#Extras_IntPf_Def7)
section of the Extras chapter for the proof of these properties.

**Interpretations of Definite Integral**

There are a couple of quick interpretations of the definite integral that we can
give here.

First, as we alluded to in the previous section one possible interpretation of
the definite integral is to give the net area between the graph of $f(x)$ and
the $x$-axis on the interval $[a, b]$. So, the net area between the graph of
$f(x) = x^2 + 1$ and the $x$-axis on $[0, 2]$ is,

$$ \int_{0}^{2}{x^2 + 1\, dx} = \frac{14}{3} $$

If you look back in the last section this was the exact area that was given for
the initial set of problems that we looked at in this area.

Another interpretation is sometimes called the Net Change Theorem. This
interpretation says that if $f(x)$ is some quantity (so $f'(x)$ is the rate of
change of $f(x)$) then,

$$ \int_{a}^{b}{f'(x)\, dx} = f(b) - f(a) $$

is the net change in $f(x)$ on the interval $[a, b]$. In other words, compute
the definite integral of a rate of change and you'll get the net change in the
quantity. We can see that the value of the definite integral, $f(b) - f(a)$,
does in fact give us the net change in $f(x)$ and so there really isn't anything
to prove with this statement. this is really just an acknowledgement of what the
definite integral of a rate of change tells us.

So as a quick example, if $V(t)$ is the volume of water in a tank then,

$$ \int_{t_1}^{t_2}{V'(t)\, dt} = V\left(t_2\right) - V\left(t_1\right) $$

is the net change in the volume as we go from time $t_1$ to time $t_2$.

Likewise, if $s(t)$ is the function giving the position of some object at time
$t$ we know that the velocity of the object at any time $t$ is : $v(t) = s'(t)$.
Therefore, the displacement of the object from time $t_1$ to time $t_2$ is,

$$ \int_{t_1}^{t_2}{v(t)\, dt} = s\left(t_2\right) - s\left(t_1\right) $$

Note that in this case if $v(t)$ is both positive and negative (_i.e._ the
object moves to both the right and left) in the time frame this will NOT give
the total distance traveled. It will only give the displacement, _i.e._ the
difference between where the object started and where it ended up. To get the
total distance traveled by an object we'd have to compute,

$$ \int_{t_1}^{t_2}{\left|v(t)\right|\, dx} $$

It is important to note here that the Net Change Theorem only really makes sense
if we're integrating a derivative of a function.

**Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part I**

As noted by the title above this is only the first part to the Fundamental
Theorem of Calculus. We will give the second part in the next section as it is
the key to easily computing definite integrals and that is the subject of the
next section.

The first part of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus tells us how to
differentiate certain types of definite integrals and it also tells us about the
very close relationship between integrals and derivatives.

**Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part I**

> If $f(x)$ is continuous on $[a, b]$ then,
>
> $$ g(x) = \int_{a}^{x}{f(t)\, dt} $$
>
> is continuous on $[a, b]$ and it is differentiable on $(a, b)$ and,
>
> $$ g'(x) = f(x) $$

An alternate notation for the derivative portion of this is,

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\int_{a}^{x}{f(t)\, dt} = f(x) $$

To see the proof of this see the
[**Proof of Various Integral Properties**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/ProofIntProp.aspx#Extras_IntPf_FToCI)
section of the Extras chapter.

Let’s check out a couple of quick examples using this.

---

**Example 6** Differentiate each of the following.

**(a)** $\displaystyle g(x) = \int_{-4}^{x}{\mathbf{e}^{2t}\cos^2(1 - 5t)\, dt}$

**Solution**

This one is nothing more than a quick application of the Fundamental Theorem of
Calculus.

$$ g'(x) = \mathbf{e}^{2x}\cos^2(1 - 5x) $$

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int_{x^2}^{1}{\frac{t^4 + 1}{t^2 + 1}\, dt}$

**Solution**

This one needs a little work before we can use the Fundamental Theorem of
Calculus. The first thing to notice is that the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus
requires the lower limit to be a constant and the upper limit to be the
variable. So, using a property of definite integrals we can interchange the
limits of the integral we just need to remember to add in a minus sign after we
do that. Doing this gives,

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\int_{x^2}^{1}{\frac{t^4 + 1}{t^2 + 1}\, dt} = \frac{d}{dx}\left(-\int_{1}^{x^2}{\frac{t^4 + 1}{t^2 + 1}\, dt}\right) = -\frac{d}{dx}\int_{1}^{x^2}{\frac{t^4 + 1}{t^2 + 1}\, dt} $$

The next thing to notice is that the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus also
requires an $x$ in the upper limit of integration and we’ve got $x^2$. To do
this derivative we’re going to need the following version of the
[**chain rule**](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcI/ChainRule.aspx).

$$ \frac{d}{dx}(g(u)) = \frac{d}{du}(g(u))\frac{du}{dx} \quad \text{ where } u = f(x) $$

So, if we let $u = x^2$ we use the chain rule to get,

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\int_{x^2}^{1}{\frac{t^4 + 1}{t^2 + 1}\, dt} = -\frac{d}{dx}\int_{1}^{x^2}{\frac{t^4 + 1}{t^2 + 1}\, d} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{d}{du}\int_{1}^{u}{\frac{t^4 + 1}{t^2 + 1}\, dt}\frac{du}{dx} \quad \text{ where } u = x^2 $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{u^4 + 1}{u^2 + 1}(2x) $$

$$ \quad = -2x\frac{u^4 + 1}{u^2 + 1} $$

The final step is to get everything back in terms of $x$.

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\int_{x^2}^{1}{\frac{t^4 + 1}{t^2 + 1}\, dt} = -2x\frac{\left(x^2\right)^4 + 1}{\left(x^2\right)^2 + 1} $$

$$ \quad = -2x\frac{x^8 + 1}{x^4 + 1} $$

---

Using the chain rule as we did in the last part of this example we can derive
some general formulas for some more complicated problems.

First,

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\int_{a}^{u(x)}{f(t)\, dt} = u'(x)f(u(x)) $$

This is simply the chain rule for these kinds of problems.

Next, we can get a formula for integrals in which the upper limit is a constant
and the lower limit is a function of $x$. All we need to do here is interchange
the limits on the integral (adding in a minus sign of course) and then use the
formula above to get,

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\int_{v(x)}^{b}{f(t)\, dt} = -\frac{d}{dx}\int_{b}^{v(x)}{f(t)\, dt} = -v'(x)f(v(x)) $$

Finally, we can also get a version for both limits being functions of $x$. In
this case we'll need to use Property 5 above to break up the integral as
follows,

$$ \int_{v(x)}^{u(x)}{f(t)\, dt} = \int_{v(x)}^{a}{f(t)\, dt} + \int_{a}^{u(x)}{f(t)\, dt} $$

We can use pretty much any value of $a$ when we break up the integral. The only
thing that we need to do is to make sure that $f(a)$ exists. So, assuming that
$f(a)$ exists after we break up the integral we can then differentiate and use
the two formulas above to get,

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\int_{v(x)}^{u(x)}{f(t)\, dt} = \frac{d}{dx}\left(\int_{v(x)}^{a}{f(t)\, dt} + \int_{a}^{u(x)}{f(t)\, dt}\right) $$

$$ = -v'(x)f(v(x)) + u'(x)f(u(x)) $$

Let's work a quick example.

---

**Example 7** Differentiate the following integral.

$$ \int_{\sqrt{x}}^{3x}{t^2\sin\left(1 + t^2\right)\, dt} $$

**Solution**

This will use the final formula that we derived above.

$$ \frac{d}{dx}\int_{\sqrt{x}}^{3x}{t^2\sin\left(1 + t^2\right)\, dt} = -\frac{1}{2}x^{-\frac{1}{2}}\left(\sqrt{x}\right)^2\sin\left(1 + \left(\sqrt{x}\right)^2\right) + (3)(3x)^2\sin\left(1 + (3x)^2\right) $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{2}\sqrt{x}\sin(1 + x) + 27x^2\sin\left(1 + 9x^2\right) $$

---

## Practice Problems

For problems 1 & 2 use the definition of the definite integral to evaluate the
integral. Use the right end point of each interval for $x_i^*$

**1.** $\displaystyle \int_{1}^{4}{2x + 3\, dx}$

**Solution**

**2.** $\displaystyle \int_{0}^{1}{6x(x - 1)\, dx}$

**Solution**

**3.** Evaluate:
$\displaystyle \int_{4}^{4}{\frac{\cos\left(\mathbf{e}^{3x} + x^2\right)}{x^4 + 1}\, dx}$

**Solution**

For problems 4 & 5 determine the value of the given integral given that
$\displaystyle \int_{6}^{11}{f(x)\, dx} = -7$ and
$\displaystyle \int_{6}^{11}{g(x)\, dx} = 24$.

**4.** $\displaystyle \int_{11}^{6}{9f(x)\, dx}$

**Solution**

**5.** $\displaystyle \int_{6}^{11}{6g(x) - 10f(x)\, dx}$

**Solution**

**6.** Determine the value of $\displaystyle \int_{2}^{9}{f(x)\, dx}$ given that
$\displaystyle \int_{5}^{2}{f(x)\, dx} = 3$ and
$\displaystyle \int_{5}^{9}{f(x)\, dx} = 8$.

**Solution**

**7.** Determine the value of $\displaystyle \int_{-4}^{20}{f(x)\, dx}$ given
that $\displaystyle \int_{-4}^{0}{f(x)\, dx} = -2$,
$\displaystyle \int_{31}^{0}{f(x)\, dx} = 19$ and
$\displaystyle \int_{20}^{31}{f(x)\, dx} = -21$.

**Solution**

For problems 8 & 9 sketch the graph of the integrand and use the area
interpretation of the definite integral to determine the value of the integral.

**8.** $\displaystyle \int_{1}^{4}{3x - 2\, dx}$

**Solution**

**9.** $\displaystyle \int_{0}^{5}{-4x\, dx}$

**Solution**

For problems 10 - 12 differentiate each of the following integrals with respect
to $x$.

**10.** $\displaystyle \int_{4}^{x}{9\cos^2\left(t^2 - 6t + 1\right)\, dt}$

**Solution**

**11.** $\displaystyle \int_{7}^{\sin(6x)}{\sqrt{t^2 + 4}\, dt}$

**Solution**

**12.** $\displaystyle \int_{3x^2}^{-1}{\frac{\mathbf{e}^t - 1}{t}\, dt}$

**Solution**

---

## Assignment Problems

For problems 1 - 4 use the definition of the definite integral to evaluate the
integral. Use the right end point of each interval for $x_i^*$.

**1.** $\displaystyle \int_{-2}^{1}{7 - 4x\, dx}$

**Solution**

**2.** $\displaystyle \int_{0}^{2}{3x^2 + 4x\, dx}$

**Solution**

**3.** $\displaystyle \int_{-1}^{1}{(x - 3)^2\, dx}$

**Solution**

**4.** $\displaystyle \int_{0}^{3}{8x^3 + 3x - 2\, dx}$

**Solution**

**5.** Evaluate $\displaystyle \int_{-123}^{-123}{\cos^6(2x) - \sin^8(4x\, dx}$

For problems 6 - 8 determine the value of the given integral given that
$\displaystyle \int_{-2}^{5}{f(x)\, dx} = 1$ and
$\displaystyle \int_{-2}^{5}{g(x)\, dx} = 8$.

**6.** $\displaystyle \int_{-2}^{5}{-3g(x)\, dx}$

**Solution**

**7.** $\displaystyle \int_{-2}^{5}{7f(x) - \frac{1}{4}g(x)\, dx}$

**Solution**

**8.** $\displaystyle \int_{5}^{-2}{12g(x) - 3f(x)\, dx}$

**Solution**

**9.** Determine the value of $\displaystyle \int_{7}^{-1}{f(x)\, dx}$ given
that $\displaystyle \int_{13}^{7}{f(x)\, dx} = -9$ and
$\displaystyle \int_{13}^{-1}{f(x)\, dx} = -12$.

**Solution**

**10.** Determine the value of $\displaystyle \int_{0}^{6}{4f(x)\, dx}$ given
that $\displaystyle \int_{0}^{5}{f(x)\, dx} = 10$ and
$\displaystyle \int_{5}^{6}{f(x)\, dx} = 3$.

**Solution**

**11.** Determine the value of $\displaystyle \int_{2}^{10}{f(x)\, dx}$ given
that $\displaystyle \int_{2}^{4}{f(x)\, dx} = -1$,
$\displaystyle \int_{4}^{7}{f(x)\, dx} = 3$ and
$\displaystyle \int_{10}^{7}{f(x)\, dx} = -8$.

**Solution**

**12.** Determine the value of $\displaystyle \int_{-5}^{-1}{f(x)\, dx}$ given
that $\displaystyle \int_{2}^{-5}{f(x)\, dx} = 56$,
$\displaystyle \int_{7}^{2}{f(x)\, dx} = -90$ and
$\displaystyle \int_{-1}^{7}{f(x)\, dx} = 45$.

**Solution**

For problems 13 - 17 sketch the graph of the integrand and use the area
interpretation of the definite integral to determine the value of the integral.

**13.** $\displaystyle \int_{-2}^{1}{12 - 5x\, dx}$

**Solution**

**14.** $\displaystyle \int_{0}^{4}{\sqrt{16 - x^2}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**15.** $\displaystyle \int_{-3}^{3}{5 - \sqrt{9 - x^2}\, dx}$

**Solution**

**16.** $\displaystyle \int_{-1}^{3}{8x - 3\, dx}$

**Solution**

**17.** $\displaystyle \int_{1}^{6}{\left|x - 3\right|\, dx}$

**Solution**

For problems 18 - 23 differentiate each of the following integrals with respect
to $x$.

**18.** $\displaystyle \int_{-8}^{x}{\mathbf{e}^{\cos(t)}\, dt}$

**Solution**

**19.** $\displaystyle \int_{2}^{x^2}{\sqrt{\cos(t) + 3}\, dt}$

**Solution**

**20.** $\displaystyle \int_{0}^{\mathbf{e}^{3x}}{\frac{1}{t^4 + t^2 + 1}\, dt}$

**Solution**

**21.** $\displaystyle \int_{\sin(9x)}^{8}{\frac{\mathbf{e}^t}{7t}\, dt}$

**Solution**

**22.** $\displaystyle \int_{x^3}^{x}{\cos^4(t) - \sin^2(t)\, dt}$

**Solution**

**23.**
$\displaystyle \int_{9x}^{\tan(x)}{\frac{\cos(t) + 2}{\sin(t) + 4}\, dt}$

**Solution**

**24.** Evaluate the limit :
$\lim\limits_{x \to 0}\frac{\displaystyle \int_{0}^{x}{\mathbf{e}^{t^2}\, dt}}{x}$

**Solution**
