# Section 5.8 : Substitution Rule For Definite Integrals

We now need to go back and revisit the substitution rule as it applies to
definite integrals. At some level there really isn’t a lot to do in this
section. Recall that the first step in doing a definite integral is to compute
the indefinite integral and that hasn't changed. We will still compute the
indefinite integral first. This means that we already know how to do these. We
use the substitution rule to find the indefinite integral and then do the
evaluation.

There are however, two ways to deal with the evaluation step. One of the ways of
doing the evaluation is the probably the most obvious at this point, but also
has a point in the process where we can get in trouble if we aren't paying
attention.

Let's work an example illustrating both ways of doing the evaluation step.

---

**Example 1** Evaluate the following definite integral.

$$ \int_{-2}^{0}{2t^2\sqrt{1 - 4t^3}\, dt} $$

**Solution**

Let's start off looking at the first way of dealing with the evaluation step.
We'll need to be careful with this method as there is a point in the process
where if we aren't paying attention we'll get the wrong answer.

_Solution 1 :_

We'll first need to compute the indefinite integral using the substitution rule.
Note however, that we will constantly remind ourselves that this is a definite
integral by putting the limits on the integral at each step. Without the limits
it's easy to forget that we had a definite integral when we've gotten the
indefinite integral computed.

In this case the substitution is,

$$ u = 1 - 4t^3 \quad \quad du = -12t^2 dt \quad \Rightarrow \quad t^2dt = -\frac{1}{12}du $$

Plugging this into the integral gives,

$$ \int_{-2}^{0}{2t^2\sqrt{1 - 4t^3}\, dt} = -\frac{1}{6}\int_{-2}^{0}{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \left. -\frac{1}{9}u^{\frac{3}{2}} \right|_{-2}^{0} $$

Notice that we didn't do the evaluation yet. This is where the potential problem
arises with this solution method. The limits given here are from the original
integral and hence are values of $t$. We have $u$'s in our solution. We can't
plug values of $t$ in for $u$.

Therefore, we will have to go back to $t$'s before we do the substitution. This
is the standard step in the substitution process, but it is often forgotten when
doing definite integrals. Note as well that in this case, if we don't go back to
$t$'s we will have a small problem in that one of the evaluations will end up
giving us a complex number.

So, finishing this problem gives,

$$ \int_{-2}^{0}{2t^2\sqrt{1 - 4t^3}\, dt} = \left. -\frac{1}{9}\left(1 - 4t^3\right)^{\frac{3}{2}} \right|_{-2}^{0} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{9} - \left(-\frac{1}{9}(33)^{\frac{3}{2}}\right) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{9}\left(33\sqrt{33} - 1\right) $$

So, that was the first solution method. Let's take a look at the second method.

_Solution 2 :_

Note that this solution method isn't really all that different from the first
method. In this method we are going to remember that when doing a substitution
we want to eliminate all the $t$'s in the integral and write everything in terms
of $u$.

When we say all here we really mean all. In other words, remember that the
limits on the integral are also values of $t$ and we’re going to convert the
limits into $u$ values. Converting the limits is pretty simple since our
substitution will tell us how to relate $t$ and $u$ so all we need to do is plug
in the original $t$ limits into the substitution and we'll get the new $u$
limits.

Here is the substitution (it's the same as the first method) as well as the
limit conversions.

$$ u = 1 - 4t^3 \quad du = -12t^2dt \quad \Rightarrow \quad t^2dt = -\frac{1}{12}du $$

$$ t = -2 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = 1 - 4(-2)^3 = 33 $$

$$ t = 0 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = 1 -4(0)^3 =1 $$

The integral is now,

$$ \int_{-2}^{0}{2t^2\sqrt{1 - 4t^3}\, dt} = -\frac{1}{6}\int_{33}^{1}{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \left. -\frac{1}{9}u^{\frac{3}{2}} \right|_{33}^{1} $$

As with the first method let's pause here a moment to remind us what we're
doing. In this case, we've converted the limits to $u$'s and we've also got our
integral in terms of $u$'s and so here we can just plug the limits directly into
our integral. Note that in this case we won't plug our substitution back in.
Doing this here would cause problems as we would have $t$'s in the integral and
our limits would be $u$'s. Here’s the rest of this problem.

$$ \int_{-2}^{0}{2t^2\sqrt{1 - 4t^3}\, dt} = \left. -\frac{1}{9}u^{\frac{3}{2}} \right|_{33}^{1} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{9} - \left(-\frac{1}{9}(33)^{\frac{3}{2}}\right) = \frac{1}{9}\left(33\sqrt{33} - 1\right) $$

We got exactly the same answer and this time didn't have to worry about going
back to $t$'s in our answer.

---

So, we've seen two solution techniques for computing definite integrals that
require the substitution rule. Both are valid solution methods and each have
their uses. We will be using the second almost exclusively however since it
makes the evaluation step a little easier.

Let's work some more examples.

---

**Example 2** Evaluate each of the following.

**Discussion**

Since we've done quite a few substitution rule integrals to this time we aren't
going to put a lot of effort into explaining the substitution part of things
here.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int_{-1}^{5}{(1 + w)\left(2w + w^2\right)^5\, dw}$

**Solution**

The substitution and converted limits are,

$$ u = 2w + w^2 \quad du = (2 + 2w)dw \quad \Rightarrow \quad (1 + w)dw = \frac{1}{2}du $$

$$ w = -1 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = -1 \quad \quad w = 5 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = 35 $$

Sometimes a limit will remain the same after the substitution. Don't get excited
when it happens and don't expect it to happen all the time.

Here is the integral,

$$ \int_{-1}^{5}{(1 + w)\left(2w + w^2\right)^5\, dw} = \frac{1}{2}\int_{-1}^{35}{u^5\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \left. \frac{1}{12}u^6 \right|_{-1}^{35} = 153188802 $$

Don't get excited about large numbers for answers here. Sometimes they are.
That's life.

**(b)**
$\displaystyle \int_{-2}^{-6}{\frac{4}{(1 + 2x)^3} - \frac{5}{1 + 2x}\, dx}$

**Solution**

Here is the substitution and converted limits for this problem,

$$ u = 1 + 2x \quad du = 2dx \quad \Rightarrow \quad dx = \frac{1}{2}du $$

$$ x = -2 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = -3 \quad \quad x = -6 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = -11 $$

The integral is then,

$$ \int_{-2}^{-6}{\frac{4}{(1 + 2x)^3} - \frac{5}{1 + 2x}\, dx} = \frac{1}{2}\int_{-3}^{-11}{4u^{-3} - \frac{5}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \left. \frac{1}{2}\left(-2u^{-2} - 5\ln|u|\right) \right|_{-3}^{-11} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\left(-\frac{2}{121} - 5\ln 11\right) - \frac{1}{2}\left(-\frac{2}{9} - 5\ln 3\right) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{112}{1089} - \frac{5}{2}\ln 11 + \frac{5}{2}\ln 3 $$

**\(c\)**
$\displaystyle \int_{0}^{\frac{1}{2}}{\mathbf{e}^y + 2\cos\left(\pi y\right)\, dy}$

**Solution**

This integral needs to be split into two integrals since the first term doesn't
require a substitution and the second does.

$$ \int_{0}^{\frac{1}{2}}{\mathbf{e}^y + 2\cos\left(\pi y\right)\, dy} = \int_{0}^{\frac{1}{2}}{\mathbf{e}^y\, dy} + \int_{0}^{\frac{1}{2}}{2\cos\left(\pi y\right)\, dy} $$

Here is the substitution and converted limits for the second term.

$$ u = \pi y \quad du = \pi dy \quad \Rightarrow \quad dy = \frac{1}{\pi}du $$

$$ y = 0 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = 0 \quad \quad y = \frac{1}{2} \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = \frac{\pi}{2} $$

Here is the integral.

$$ \int_{0}^{\frac{1}{2}}{\mathbf{e}^y + 2\cos\left(\pi y\right)\, dy} = \int_{0}^{\frac{1}{2}}{\mathbf{e}^y\, dy} + \frac{2}{\pi}\int_{0}^{\frac{\pi}{2}}{\cos(u)\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \left. \mathbf{e}^y \right|_{0}^{\frac{1}{2}} + \left. \frac{2}{\pi}\sin u \right|_{0}^{\frac{\pi}{2}} $$

$$ \quad = \mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{2}} - \mathbf{e}^0 + \frac{2}{\pi}\sin\frac{\pi}{2} - \frac{2}{\pi}\sin 0 $$

$$ \quad = \mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{2}} - 1 + \frac{2}{\pi} $$

**(d)**
$\displaystyle \int_{\frac{\pi}{3}}^{0}{3\sin\left(\frac{z}{2}\right) - 5\cos\left(\pi - z\right)\, dz}$

**Solution**

This integral will require two substitutions. So first split up the integral so
we can do a substitution on each term.

$$ \int_{\frac{\pi}{3}}^{0}{3\sin\left(\frac{z}{2}\right) - 5\cos\left(\pi - z\right)\, dz} = \int_{\frac{\pi}{3}}^{0}{3\sin\left(\frac{z}{2}\right)\, dz} - \int_{\frac{\pi}{3}}^{0}{5\cos\left(\pi - z\right)\, dz} $$

There are the two substitutions for these integrals.

$$ u = \frac{z}{2} \quad du = \frac{1}{2}dz \quad \Rightarrow \quad dz = 2du $$

$$ z = \frac{\pi}{3} \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = \frac{\pi}{6} \quad \quad z = 0 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = 0 $$

$$ v = \pi - z \quad dv = -dz \quad \Rightarrow \quad dz = -dv $$

$$ z = \frac{\pi}{3} \quad \Rightarrow \quad v = \frac{2\pi}{3} \quad \quad z = 0 \quad \Rightarrow \quad v = \pi $$

Here is the integral for this problem.

$$ \int_{\frac{\pi}{3}}^{0}{3\sin\left(\frac{z}{2}\right) - 5\cos\left(\pi - z\right)\, dz} = 6\int_{\frac{\pi}{6}}^{0}{\sin(u)\, du} + 5\int_{\frac{2\pi}{3}}^{\pi}{\cos(v)\, dv} $$

$$ \quad = \left. -6\cos(u) \right|_{\frac{\pi}{6}}^{0} + \left. 5\sin(v) \right|_{\frac{2\pi}{3}}^{\pi} $$

$$ \quad = 3\sqrt{3} - 6 + \left(-\frac{5\sqrt{3}}{}\right) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} - 6 $$

---

The next set of examples is designed to make sure that we don't forget about a
very important point about definite integrals.

---

**Example 3** Evaluate each of the following.

**(a)** $\displaystyle \int_{-5}^{5}{\frac{4t}{2 - 8t^2}\, dt}$

**Solution**

Be careful with this integral. The denominator is zero at $t = \pm \dfrac{1}{2}$
and both of these are in the interval of integration. Therefore, this integrand
is not continuous in the interval and so the integral can't be done.

Be careful with definite integrals and be on the lookout for division by zero
problems. In the previous section they were easy to spot since all the division
by zero problems that we had there were where the variable was itself zero. Once
we move into substitution problems however they will not always be so easy to
spot so make sure that you first take a quick look at the integrand and see if
there are any continuity problems with the integrand and if they occur in the
interval of integration.

**(b)** $\displaystyle \int_{3}^{5}{\frac{4t}{2 - 8t^2}\, dt}$

**Solution**

Now, in this case the integral can be done because the two points of
discontinuity, $t = \pm \dfrac{1}{2}$, are both outside of the interval of
integration. The substitution and converted limits in this case are,

$$ u = 2 - 8t^2 \quad du = -16t dt \quad \Rightarrow \quad t dt = -\frac{1}{16}du $$

$$ t = 3 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = -70 \quad t = 5 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = -198 $$

The integral is then,

$$ \int_{3}^{5}{\frac{4t}{2 - 8t^2}\, dt} = -\frac{4}{16}\int_{-70}^{-198}{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \left. -\frac{1}{4}\ln|u| \right|_{-70}^{-198} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{4}\left(\ln(198) - \ln(70)\right) $$

---

Let's work another set of examples. These are a little tougher (at least in
appearance) than the previous sets.

---

**Example 4** Evaluate each of the following.

**(a)**
$\displaystyle \int_{0}^{\ln(1 + \pi)}{\mathbf{e}^x\cos\left(1 - \mathbf{e}^x\right)\, dx}$

**Solution**

The limits are a little unusual in this case, but that will happen sometimes so
don't get too excited about it. Here is the substitution.

$$ u = 1 - \mathbf{e}^x \quad du = -\mathbf{e}^x dx $$

$$ x = 0 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = 1 - \mathbf{e}^0 = 1 - 1 = 0 $$

$$ x = \ln(1 + \pi) \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = 1 - \mathbf{e}^{\ln(1 + \pi)} = 1 - (1 + \pi) = -\pi $$

The integral is then,

$$ \int_{0}^{\ln(1 + \pi)}{\mathbf{e}^x\cos\left(1 - \mathbf{e}^x\right)\, dx} = -\int_{0}^{-\pi}{\cos u\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \left. -\sin(u) \right|_{0}^{-\pi} $$

$$ \quad = -(\sin(-\pi) - \sin 0) = 0 $$

**(b)**
$\displaystyle \int_{\mathbf{e}^2}^{\mathbf{e}^6}{\frac{\left[\ln t\right]^4}{t}\, dt}$

**Solution**

Here is the substitution and converted limits for this problem.

$$ u = \ln t \quad du = \frac{1}{t} dt $$

$$ t = \mathbf{e}^2 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = \ln\mathbf{e}^2 = 2 \quad t = \mathbf{e}^6 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = \ln\mathbf{e}^6 = 6 $$

The integral is,

$$ \int_{\mathbf{e}^2}^{\mathbf{e}^6}{\frac{\left[\ln t\right]^4}{t}\, dt} = \int_{2}^{6}{u^4\, du} $$

$$ \quad \left. \frac{1}{5}u^5 \right|_{2}^{6} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{7744}{5} $$

**\(c\)**
$\displaystyle \int_{\frac{\pi}{12}}^{\frac{\pi}{9}}{\frac{\sec(3P)\tan(3P)}{\sqrt[3]{2 + \sec(3P)}}\, dP}$

**Solution**

Here is the substitution and converted limits and don't get too excited about
the substitution. It's a little messy in the case, but that can happen on
occasion.

$$ u = 2 + \sec(3P) \quad du = 3\sec(3P)\tan(3P)dP \quad \Rightarrow \quad \sec(3P)\tan(3P)dP = \frac{1}{3}du $$

$$ P = \frac{\pi}{12} \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = 2 + \sec\left(\frac{\pi}{4}\right) = 2 + \sqrt{2} $$

$$ P = \frac{\pi}{9} \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = 2 + \sec\left(\frac{\pi}{3}\right) = 4 $$

Here is the integral,

$$ \int_{\frac{\pi}{12}}^{\frac{\pi}{9}}{\frac{\sec(3P)\tan(3P)}{\sqrt[3]{2 + \sec(3P)}}\, dP} = \frac{1}{3}\int_{2+ \sqrt{2}}^{4}{u^{-\frac{1}{3}}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \left. \frac{1}{2}u^{\frac{2}{3}} \right|_{2 + \sqrt{2}}^{4} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\left(4^{\frac{2}{3}} - \left(2 + \sqrt{2}\right)^{\frac{2}{3}}\right) $$

So, not only was the substitution messy, but we also have a messy answer, but
again that's life on occasion.

**(d)** $\displaystyle \int_{-\pi}^{\frac{\pi}{2}}{\cos(x)\cos(\sin(x))\, dx}$

**Solution**

This problem not as bad as it looks. Here is the substitution and converted
limits.

$$ u = \sin x \quad du = \cos x dx $$

$$ x = \frac{\pi}{2} \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = \sin \frac{\pi}{2} = 1 \quad \quad x = -\pi \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = \sin(-\pi) = 0 $$

The cosine in the very front of the integrand will get substituted away in the
differential and so this integrand actually simplifies down significantly. Here
is the integral.

$$ \int_{-\pi}^{\frac{\pi}{2}}{\cos(x)\cos(\sin(x))\, dx} = \int_{0}^{1}{\cos u\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \left. \sin(u) \right|_{0}^{1} $$

$$ \quad = \sin(1) - \sin(0) $$

$$ \quad = \sin(1) $$

Don't get excited about these kinds of answers. On occasion we will end up with
trig function evaluations like this.

**(e)**
$\displaystyle \int_{\frac{1}{50}}^{2}{\frac{\mathbf{e}^{\frac{2}{w}}}{w^2}\, dw}$

**Solution**

This is also a tricky substitution (at least until you see it). Here it is,

$$ u = \frac{2}{w} \quad du = -\frac{2}{w^2}dw \quad \Rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{w^2}dw = -\frac{1}{2}du $$

$$ w = 2 \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = 1 \quad \quad w = \frac{1}{50} \quad \Rightarrow \quad u = 100 $$

Here is the integral.

$$ \int_{\frac{1}{50}}^{2}{\frac{\mathbf{e}^{\frac{2}{w}}}{w^2}\, dw} = -\frac{1}{2}\int_{100}^{1}{\mathbf{e}^u\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \left. -\frac{1}{2}\mathbf{e}^u \right|_{100}^{1} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{2}\left(\mathbf{e}^1 - \mathbf{e}^{100}\right) $$

---

In this last set of examples we saw some tricky substitutions and messy limits,
but these are a fact of life with some substitution problems and so we need to
be prepared for dealing with them when they happen.

---

## Practice Problems

Evaluate each of the following integrals, if possible. If it is not possible
clearly explain why it is not possible to evaluate the integral.

**1.**
$\displaystyle \int_{0}^{1}{3\left(4x + x^4\right)\left(10x^2 + x^5 - 2\right)^6\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 10x^2 + x^5 - 2 \quad du = 20x + 5x^4dx \quad du = 5\left(4x + x^4\right)dx \quad \Rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{5}du = \left(4x + x^4\right)dx $$

$$ x = 0 \quad u = 10(0)^2 + (0)^5 - 2 = -2 $$

$$ x = 1 \quad u = 10(1)^2 + (1)^5 - 2 = 9 $$

$$ \int_{0}^{1}{3\left(4x + x^4\right)\left(10x^2 + x^5 - 2\right)^6\, dx} = \frac{3}{5}\int_{-2}^{9}{u^6 \, du} $$

$$ \quad = \left. \frac{3}{5}\left(\frac{1}{7}u^7\right) \right|_{-2}^{9} $$

$$ \quad = \left. \frac{3}{5}\left(\frac{1}{7}\right)\left(u^7\right) \right|_{-2}^{9} $$

$$ \quad = \left. \frac{3}{35}\left(u^7\right) \right|_{-2}^{9} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{3}{35}\left((9)^7 - (-2)^7\right) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{3}{35}\left(4782969 - (-128)\right) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{3}{35}(4783097) $$

$$ \boxed{\quad = \frac{14349291}{35}} $$

**2.**
$\displaystyle \int_{0}^{\frac{\pi}{4}}{\frac{8\cos(2t)}{\sqrt{9 - 5\sin(2t)}}\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 9 - 5\sin(2t) \quad du = \left(-10\cos(2t)\right)dt \quad \Rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{10}du = \cos(2t)dt $$

$$ t = 0 \quad u = 9 - 5\sin(2(0)) = 9 $$

$$ t = \frac{\pi}{4} \quad u = 9 - 5\sin(2\left(\frac{\pi}{4}\right)) = 4 $$

$$ \int_{0}^{\frac{\pi}{4}}{\frac{8\cos(2t)}{\sqrt{9 - 5\sin(2t)}}\, dt} = -\frac{8}{10}\int_{9}^{4}{u^{-\frac{1}{2}}\, du}$$

$$ \quad = \left. -\frac{8}{10}(2)\left(u^{\frac{1}{2}}\right) \right|_{9}^{4} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{8}{5}\left((4)^{\frac{1}{2}} - (9)^{\frac{1}{2}}\right) $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{8}{5}(2 - 3) $$

$$ \boxed{\quad = \frac{8}{5}} $$

**3.** $\displaystyle \int_{\pi}^{0}{\sin(z)\cos^3(z)\, dz}$

**Solution**

$$ u = \cos(z) \quad du = -\sin(z)dz \quad \Rightarrow \quad -du = \sin(z)dz $$

$$ z = \pi \quad = \cos(\pi) = -1 $$

$$ z = 0 \quad = \cos(0) = 1 $$

$$ \int_{\pi}^{0}{\sin(z)\cos^3(z)\, dz} = -\int_{-1}^{1}{u^3\, du} $$

$$ \int_{\pi}^{0}{\sin(z)\cos^3(z)\, dz} = \left. -\frac{1}{4}\left(u^4\right) \right|_{-1}^{1} $$

$$ \int_{\pi}^{0}{\sin(z)\cos^3(z)\, dz} = -\frac{1}{4}\left((1)^4 - (-1)^4\right) $$

$$ \int_{\pi}^{0}{\sin(z)\cos^3(z)\, dz} = -\frac{1}{4}(1 - 1) $$

$$ \boxed{\int_{\pi}^{0}{\sin(z)\cos^3(z)\, dz} = 0} $$

**4.** $\displaystyle \int_{1}^{4}{\sqrt{w}\mathbf{e}^{1 - \sqrt{w^3}}\, dw}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 1 - w^{\frac{3}{2}} \quad du = -\frac{3}{2}w^{\frac{1}{2}}dw \quad \Rightarrow \quad -\frac{2}{3}du = \sqrt{w}dw $$

$$ w = 1 \quad u = 1 - (1)^{\frac{3}{2}} = 0 $$

$$ w = 4 \quad u = 1 - (4)^{\frac{3}{2}} = -7 $$

$$ \int_{1}^{4}{\sqrt{w}\mathbf{e}^{1 - \sqrt{w^3}}\, dw} = -\frac{2}{3}\int_{0}^{-7}{\mathbf{e}^u\, du} $$

$$ \int_{1}^{4}{\sqrt{w}\mathbf{e}^{1 - \sqrt{w^3}}\, dw} = \left. \left(-\frac{2}{3}\right)\left(\mathbf{e}^u\right) \right|_{0}^{-7} $$

$$ \int_{1}^{4}{\sqrt{w}\mathbf{e}^{1 - \sqrt{w^3}}\, dw} = -\frac{2}{3}\left(\mathbf{e}^{-7} - \mathbf{e}^{0}\right) $$

$$ \int_{1}^{4}{\sqrt{w}\mathbf{e}^{1 - \sqrt{w^3}}\, dw} = -\frac{2}{3}\left(\mathbf{e}^{-7} - 1\right) $$

$$ \boxed{\int_{1}^{4}{\sqrt{w}\mathbf{e}^{1 - \sqrt{w^3}}\, dw} = \frac{2}{3}\left(1 - \mathbf{e}^{-7}\right)} $$

**5.** $\displaystyle \int_{-4}^{-1}{\sqrt[3]{5 - 2y} + \frac{7}{5 - 2y}\, dy}$

**Solution**

$$ \int_{-4}^{-1}{\sqrt[3]{5 - 2y} + \frac{7}{5 - 2y}\, dy} = \int_{-4}^{-1}{\sqrt[3]{5 - 2y}\, dy} + \int_{-4}^{-1}{\frac{7}{5 - 2y}\, dy} $$

$$ u = 5 - 2y \quad du = -2dy \quad \Rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{2}du = dy $$

$$ y = -4 \quad u = 5 - 2(-4) = 13 $$

$$ y = -1 \quad u = 5 - 2(-1) = 7 $$

$$ \int_{-4}^{-1}{\sqrt[3]{5 - 2y} + \frac{7}{5 - 2y}\, dy} = -\frac{1}{2}\int_{13}^{7}{u^{\frac{1}{3}}\, du} - \frac{7}{2}\int_{13}^{7}{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \int_{-4}^{-1}{\sqrt[3]{5 - 2y} + \frac{7}{5 - 2y}\, dy} = \left. -\frac{1}{2}\left(\frac{3}{4}\right)\left(u^{\frac{4}{3}}\right) \right|_{13}^{7} - \left. \frac{7}{2}\left(\ln|u|\right) \right|_{13}^{7} $$

$$ \boxed{\int_{-4}^{-1}{\sqrt[3]{5 - 2y} + \frac{7}{5 - 2y}\, dy} = -\frac{3}{8}\left(7^{\frac{4}{3}} - 13^{\frac{4}{3}}\right) - \frac{7}{2}\left(\ln|7| - \ln|13|\right)} $$

**6.** $\displaystyle \int_{-1}^{2}{x^3 + \mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \int_{-1}^{2}{x^3 + \mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x}\, dx} = \int_{-1}^{2}{x^3\, dx} + \int_{-1}^{2}{\mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x}\, dx}  $$

$$ u = \frac{1}{4}x \quad du = \frac{1}{4}dx \quad \Rightarrow \quad 4du = dx  $$

$$ x = -1 \quad u = -\frac{1}{4} $$

$$ x = 2 \quad u = \frac{1}{2} $$

$$ \int_{-1}^{2}{x^3 + \mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x}\, dx} = \int_{-1}^{2}{x^3\, dx} + 4\int_{-\frac{1}{4}}^{\frac{1}{2}}{\mathbf{e}^u\, du}  $$

$$ \int_{-1}^{2}{x^3 + \mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x}\, dx} = \left. \left(\frac{1}{4}x^4\right) \right|_{-1}^{2} + 4 \left. \left(\mathbf{e}^u\right) \right|_{-\frac{1}{4}}^{\frac{1}{2}} $$

$$ \int_{-1}^{2}{x^3 + \mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x}\, dx} = \frac{1}{4}\left((2)^4 - (-1)^4\right) + 4\left(\mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{2}} - \mathbf{e}^{-\frac{1}{4}}\right) $$

$$ \boxed{\int_{-1}^{2}{x^3 + \mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{4}x}\, dx} = \frac{15}{4} + 4\left(\mathbf{e}^{\frac{1}{2}} - \mathbf{e}^{-\frac{1}{4}}\right)} $$

**7.** $\displaystyle \int_{\pi}^{\frac{3\pi}{2}}{6\sin(2w) - 7\cos(w)\, dw}$

**Solution**

$$ \int_{\pi}^{\frac{3\pi}{2}}{6\sin(2w) - 7\cos(w)\, dw} = \int_{\pi}^{\frac{3\pi}{2}}{6\sin(2w)\, dw} - \int_{\pi}^{\frac{3\pi}{2}}{7\cos(w)\, dw}  $$

$$ u = 2w \quad du = (2)dw \quad \Rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{2}du = dw $$

$$ w = \pi  \quad u = 2\pi $$

$$ w = \frac{3\pi}{2} \quad u = 3\pi$$

$$ \int_{\pi}^{\frac{3\pi}{2}}{6\sin(2w) - 7\cos(w)\, dw} = \frac{6}{2}\int_{2\pi}^{3\pi}{\sin(u)\, du} - 7\int_{\pi}^{\frac{3\pi}{2}}{\cos(w)\, dw}  $$

$$ \int_{\pi}^{\frac{3\pi}{2}}{6\sin(2w) - 7\cos(w)\, dw} = 3 \left. \left(-\cos(u)\right) \right|_{2\pi}^{3\pi} - 7 \left. \left(\sin(w)\right) \right|_{\pi}^{\frac{3\pi}{2}} $$

$$ \int_{\pi}^{\frac{3\pi}{2}}{6\sin(2w) - 7\cos(w)\, dw} = 3\left(-\cos(3\pi) - (-\cos(2\pi))\right) - 7\left(\sin\left(\frac{3\pi}{2}\right) - \sin(\pi)\right) $$

$$ \int_{\pi}^{\frac{3\pi}{2}}{6\sin(2w) - 7\cos(w)\, dw} = 3(2) - 7(-1) $$

$$ \int_{\pi}^{\frac{3\pi}{2}}{6\sin(2w) - 7\cos(w)\, dw} = 6 + 7 $$

$$ \boxed{\int_{\pi}^{\frac{3\pi}{2}}{6\sin(2w) - 7\cos(w)\, dw} = 13} $$

**8.**
$\displaystyle \int_{1}^{5}{\frac{2x^3 + x}{x^4 + x^2 + 1} - \frac{x}{x^2 - 4}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ x^2 - 4 = 0 $$

$$ x^2 = 4 $$

$$ x = \pm 2 $$

The second term can have a denominator of $0$ as the integrand must be
continuous within teh range of $[1, 5]$, and the second term will have a
division by $0$ error at $x = 2$. Thusly the integrand is NOT continuous within
the given range and therefore we can not use The Fundamental Theorem Of Calculus
to evaluate this definite integral.

**9.**
$\displaystyle \int_{-2}^{0}{t\sqrt{3 + t^2} + \frac{3}{(6t - 1)^2}\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ 6t - 1 = 0 $$

$$ 6t = 1 $$

$$ t = \frac{1}{6} $$

$$ \int_{-2}^{0}{t\sqrt{3 + t^2} + \frac{3}{(6t - 1)^2}\, dt} = \int_{-2}^{0}{t\left(3 + t^2\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}\, dt} + \int_{-2}^{0}{\frac{3}{(6t - 1)^2}\, dt} $$

$$ u = 3 + t^2 \quad du = (2t)dt \quad \Rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{2}du = tdt $$

$$ t = -2 \quad u = 3 + (-2)^2 = 7 $$

$$ t = 0 \quad  u = 3 + (0)^2 = 3 $$

$$ v = 6t - 1 \quad dv = 6dt \quad \Rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{6}dv = dt $$

$$ t = -2 \quad v = 6(-2) - 1 = -13 $$

$$ t = 0 \quad v = 6(0) - 1 = -1 $$

$$ \int_{-2}^{0}{t\sqrt{3 + t^2} + \frac{3}{(6t - 1)^2}\, dt} = \frac{1}{2}\int_{7}^{3}{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} + \frac{3}{6}\int_{-13}^{-1}{v^{-2}\, dv} $$

$$ \int_{-2}^{0}{t\sqrt{3 + t^2} + \frac{3}{(6t - 1)^2}\, dt} = \frac{1}{2} \left. \left(\frac{2}{3}\right)\left(u^{\frac{3}{2}}\right) \right|_{7}^{3} + \frac{1}{2} \left. (-1)\left(v^{-1}\right) \right|_{-13}^{-1} $$

$$ \int_{-2}^{0}{t\sqrt{3 + t^2} + \frac{3}{(6t - 1)^2}\, dt} = \frac{1}{3} \left. \left(u^{\frac{3}{2}}\right) \right|_{7}^{3} - \frac{1}{2} \left. \left(v^{-1}\right) \right|_{-13}^{-1} $$

$$ \int_{-2}^{0}{t\sqrt{3 + t^2} + \frac{3}{(6t - 1)^2}\, dt} = \frac{1}{3}\left((3)^{\frac{3}{2}} - (7)^{\frac{3}{2}}\right) - \frac{1}{2}\left((-1)^{-1} - (-13)^{-1}\right) $$

$$ \int_{-2}^{0}{t\sqrt{3 + t^2} + \frac{3}{(6t - 1)^2}\, dt} = \frac{1}{3}\left((3)^{\frac{3}{2}} - (7)^{\frac{3}{2}}\right) - \frac{1}{2}\left(-1 + \frac{1}{13}\right) $$

$$ \boxed{\int_{-2}^{0}{t\sqrt{3 + t^2} + \frac{3}{(6t - 1)^2}\, dt} = \frac{1}{3}\left(3^{\frac{3}{2}} - 7^{\frac{3}{2}}\right) + \frac{6}{13}} $$

**10.**
$\displaystyle \int_{-2}^{1}{(2 - z)^3 + \sin(\pi z)\left[3 + 2\cos(\pi z)\right]^3\, dz}$

**Solution**

$$ \int_{-2}^{1}{(2 - z)^3 + \sin(\pi z)\left[3 + 2\cos(\pi z)\right]^3\, dz} = \int_{-2}^{1}{(2 - z)^3\, dz} + \int_{-2}^{1}{\sin(\pi z)\left[3 + 2\cos(\pi z)\right]^3\, dz}  $$

$$ u = 2 - z \quad du = -1dz \quad \Rightarrow \quad -du = dz $$

$$ z = -2 \quad u = 2 - (-2) = 4 $$

$$ z = 1 \quad u = 2 - (1) = 1 $$

$$ v = 3 + 2\cos(\pi z) \quad dv = (-2\pi\sin(\pi z))dz \quad \Rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{2\pi}du = \sin(\pi z)dz $$

$$ z = -2 \quad v = 3 + 2\cos(-2\pi) = 5 $$

$$ z = 1 \quad v = 3 + 2\cos(\pi) = 1 $$

$$ \int_{-2}^{1}{(2 - z)^3 + \sin(\pi z)\left[3 + 2\cos(\pi z)\right]^3\, dz} = -\int_{4}^{1}{u^3\, du} - \frac{1}{2\pi}\int_{5}^{1}{v^3\, dv} $$

$$ \quad = -1 \left. \left(\frac{1}{4}\right)\left(u^4\right) \right|_{4}^{1} - \frac{1}{2\pi} \left. \left(\frac{1}{4}\right)\left(v^4\right) \right|_{5}^{1} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{4}\left((1)^4 - (4)^4\right) - \frac{1}{8\pi}\left((1)^4 - (5)^4\right) $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{4}\left(1 - 256\right) - \frac{1}{8\pi}\left(1 - 625\right) $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{4}(-255) - \frac{1}{8\pi}(-624) $$

$$ \boxed{\quad = \frac{255}{4} + \frac{78}{\pi}} $$

---

## Assignment Problems

Evaluate each of the following integrals, if possible. If it is not possible
clearly explain why it is not possible to evaluate the integral.

**1.** $\displaystyle \int_{-2}^{3}{\frac{4}{(5 + 2x)^3}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 5 + 2x \quad du = (2)dx \quad \Rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{2}du = dx $$

$$ x = -2 \quad u = 5 + 2(-2) = 1 $$

$$ x = 3 \quad u = 5 + 2(3) = 11 $$

$$ \int_{-2}^{3}{\frac{4}{(5 + 2x)^3}\, dx} = \frac{4}{2}\int_{1}^{11}{u^{-3}\, du} $$

$$ \int_{-2}^{3}{\frac{4}{(5 + 2x)^3}\, dx} = 2 \left. \left(-\frac{1}{2}\right)\left(u^{-2}\right) \right|_{1}^{11} $$

$$ \int_{-2}^{3}{\frac{4}{(5 + 2x)^3}\, dx} = -1\left((11)^{-2} - (1)^{-2}\right) $$

$$ \int_{-2}^{3}{\frac{4}{(5 + 2x)^3}\, dx} = 1 - \frac{1}{121} $$

$$ \boxed{\int_{-2}^{3}{\frac{4}{(5 + 2x)^3}\, dx} = \frac{120}{121}} $$

**2.**
$\displaystyle \int_{1}^{0}{10\left(1 - 2w^2\right)\sqrt[4]{7 - 3w + 2w^3}\, dw}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 7 - 3w + 2w^3 \quad du = \left(-3 + 6w^2\right)dw = -3\left(1 - 2w^2\right)dw \quad \Rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{3}du = \left(1 - 2w^2\right)dw $$

$$ w = 1 \quad u = 7 - 3(1) + 2(1)^3 = 6 $$

$$ w = 0 \quad u = 7 - 3(0) + 2(0)^3 = 7 $$

$$ \int_{1}^{0}{10\left(1 - 2w^2\right)\sqrt[4]{7 - 3w + 2w^3}\, dw} = -\frac{10}{3}\int_{6}^{7}{u^{\frac{1}{4}}\, du} $$

$$ \int_{1}^{0}{10\left(1 - 2w^2\right)\sqrt[4]{7 - 3w + 2w^3}\, dw} = -\frac{10}{3} \left. \left(\frac{4}{5}\right)\left(u^{\frac{5}{4}}\right) \right|_{6}^{7} $$

$$ \boxed{\int_{1}^{0}{10\left(1 - 2w^2\right)\sqrt[4]{7 - 3w + 2w^3}\, dw} = -\frac{8}{3}\left(7^{\frac{5}{4}} - 6^{\frac{5}{4}}\right)} $$

**3.** $\displaystyle \int_{-1}^{4}{(t - 2)\mathbf{e}^{t^2 - 4t}\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ u = t^2 - 4t \quad du = (2t - 4)dt = 2(t - 2)dt \quad \Rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{2}du = (t - 2)dt $$

$$ t = -1 \quad u = (-1)^2 - 4(-1) = 5 $$

$$ t = 4 \quad u = (4)^2 - 4(4) = 0 $$

$$ \int_{-1}^{4}{(t - 2)\mathbf{e}^{t^2 - 4t}\, dt} = \frac{1}{2}\int_{5}^{0}{\mathbf{e}^u\, du} $$

$$ \int_{-1}^{4}{(t - 2)\mathbf{e}^{t^2 - 4t}\, dt} = \frac{1}{2} \left. \left(\mathbf{e}^u\right) \right|_{5}^{0} $$

$$ \int_{-1}^{4}{(t - 2)\mathbf{e}^{t^2 - 4t}\, dt} = \frac{1}{2}\left(\mathbf{e}^{(0)} - \mathbf{e}^{(5)}\right) $$

$$ \boxed{\int_{-1}^{4}{(t - 2)\mathbf{e}^{t^2 - 4t}\, dt} = \frac{1}{2}\left(1 - \mathbf{e}^{5}\right)} $$

**4.**
$\displaystyle \int_{1}^{6}{7\cos\left(\frac{\pi z}{2}\right)\left(4 + \sin\left(\frac{\pi z}{2}\right)\right)^5\, dz}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 4 + \sin\left(\frac{\pi z}{2}\right) \quad du = \left(\frac{\pi}{2}\cos\left(\frac{\pi z}{2}\right)\right)dz \quad \Rightarrow \quad \frac{2}{\pi}du = \cos\left(\frac{\pi z}{2}\right)dz $$

$$ z = 1 \quad u = 4 + \sin\left(\frac{\pi (1)}{2}\right) = 5 $$

$$ z = 6 \quad u = 4 + \sin\left(\frac{\pi (6)}{2}\right) = 4 $$

$$ \int_{1}^{6}{7\cos\left(\frac{\pi z}{2}\right)\left(4 + \sin\left(\frac{\pi z}{2}\right)\right)^5\, dz} = \frac{7(2)}{\pi}\int_{5}^{4}{u^5\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{14}{\pi} \left. \left(\frac{1}{6}\right)\left(u^6\right) \right|_{5}^{4} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{14}{6\pi}\left((4)^6 - (5)^6\right) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{7}{3\pi}(4096 - 15625) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{7}{3\pi}(-11529) $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{80703}{3\pi} $$

$$ \boxed{\quad = -\frac{26901}{\pi}} $$

**5.** $\displaystyle \int_{0}^{1}{\frac{w^3}{6w^4 + 3}\, dw}$

**Solution**

$$ u = 6w^4 + 3 \quad du = \left(24w^3\right)dw \quad \Rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{24}du = \left(w^3\right)dw $$

$$ w = 0 \quad u = 6(0)^4 + 3 = 3 $$

$$ w = 1 \quad u = 6(1)^4 + 3 = 9 $$

$$ \int_{0}^{1}{\frac{w^3}{6w^4 + 3}\, dw} = \frac{1}{24}\int_{3}^{9}{\frac{1}{u}\, du} $$

$$ \int_{0}^{1}{\frac{w^3}{6w^4 + 3}\, dw} = \frac{1}{24} \left. \left(\ln|u|\right) \right|_{3}^{9} $$

$$ \int_{0}^{1}{\frac{w^3}{6w^4 + 3}\, dw} = \frac{1}{24}\left(\ln|9| - \ln|3|\right) $$

$$ \boxed{\int_{0}^{1}{\frac{w^3}{6w^4 + 3}\, dw} = \frac{1}{24}\left(\ln(9) - \ln(3)\right)} $$

**6.**
$\displaystyle \int_{-1}^{1}{x^2\cos\left(x^3 + 2\right) - x^2\mathbf{e}^{x^3 + 2}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \int_{-1}^{1}{x^2\cos\left(x^3 + 2\right) - x^2\mathbf{e}^{x^3 + 2}\, dx} = \int_{-1}^{1}{x^2\cos\left(x^3 + 2\right)\, dx} - \int_{-1}^{1}{x^2\mathbf{e}^{x^3 + 2}\, dx} $$

$$ u = x^3 + 2 \quad du = \left(3x^2\right)dx \quad \Rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{3}du = \left(x^2\right)dx $$

$$ x = -1 \quad u = (-1)^3 + 2 = 1 $$

$$ x = 1 \quad u = (1)^3 + 2 = 3 $$

$$ \int_{-1}^{1}{x^2\cos\left(x^3 + 2\right) - x^2\mathbf{e}^{x^3 + 2}\, dx} = \frac{1}{3}\int_{1}^{3}{\cos(u)\, du} - \frac{1}{3}\int_{1}^{3}{\mathbf{e}^u\, du} $$

$$ \int_{-1}^{1}{x^2\cos\left(x^3 + 2\right) - x^2\mathbf{e}^{x^3 + 2}\, dx} = \frac{1}{3} \left. \left(\sin(u)\right) \right|_{1}^{3} - \frac{1}{3} \left. \left(\mathbf{e}^u\right) \right|_{1}^{3} $$

$$ \int_{-1}^{1}{x^2\cos\left(x^3 + 2\right) - x^2\mathbf{e}^{x^3 + 2}\, dx} = \frac{1}{3}\left(\sin(3) - \sin(1)\right) - \frac{1}{3}\left(\mathbf{e}^{(3)} - \mathbf{e}^{(1)}\right) $$

$$ \int_{-1}^{1}{x^2\cos\left(x^3 + 2\right) - x^2\mathbf{e}^{x^3 + 2}\, dx} = \frac{1}{3}\left(\sin(3) - \sin(1)\right) - \frac{1}{3}\left(\mathbf{e}^{(3)} - \mathbf{e}^{(1)}\right) $$

$$ \boxed{\int_{-1}^{1}{x^2\cos\left(x^3 + 2\right) - x^2\mathbf{e}^{x^3 + 2}\, dx} = \frac{1}{3}\left[\sin(3) - \sin(1) - \mathbf{e}^3 + \mathbf{e}\right]} $$

**7.**
$\displaystyle \int_{0}^{\frac{\pi}{3}}{\frac{4\sin(3t)}{2 + \cos(3t)} + \frac{7\sin(3t)}{\left(2 + \cos(3t)\right)^2}\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ \int_{0}^{\frac{\pi}{3}}{\frac{4\sin(3t)}{2 + \cos(3t)} + \frac{7\sin(3t)}{\left(2 + \cos(3t)\right)^2}\, dt} = \int_{0}^{\frac{\pi}{3}}{\frac{4\sin(3t)}{2 + \cos(3t)}\, dt} + \int_{0}^{\frac{\pi}{3}}{\frac{7\sin(3t)}{\left(2 + \cos(3t)\right)^2}\, dt} $$

$$ u = 2 + \cos(3t) \quad du = (-3\sin(3t))dt \quad \Rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{3}du = (\sin(3t))dt $$

$$ t = 0 \quad u = 2 + \cos(3(0)) = 3 $$

$$ t = \frac{\pi}{3} \quad u = 2 + \cos\left(3\left(\frac{\pi}{3}\right)\right) = 1 $$

$$ \int_{0}^{\frac{\pi}{3}}{\frac{4\sin(3t)}{2 + \cos(3t)} + \frac{7\sin(3t)}{\left(2 + \cos(3t)\right)^2}\, dt} = -\frac{4}{3}\int_{3}^{1}{\frac{1}{u}\, du} - \frac{7}{3}\int_{3}^{1}{u^{-2}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{4}{3}\left. \left(\ln|u|\right) \right|_{3}^{1} - \frac{7}{3} \left. (-1)\left(u^{-1}\right) \right|_{3}^{1} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{4}{3}\left(\ln|1| - \ln|3|\right) + \frac{7}{3}\left((1)^{-1} - (3)^{-1}\right) $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{4}{3}\left(\ln(1) - \ln(3)\right) + \frac{7}{3}\left(1 - \frac{1}{3}\right) $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{4}{3}\left(\ln(1) - \ln(3)\right) + \frac{7}{3}\left(\frac{2}{3}\right) $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{4}{3}\left(0 - \ln(3)\right) + \frac{7}{3}\left(\frac{2}{3}\right) $$

$$ \boxed{\quad = \frac{4}{3}\ln(3) + \frac{7}{3}\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)} $$

**8.** $\displaystyle \int_{0}^{\pi}{\sec^2(y)\sqrt{2 + \tan(y)}\, dy}$

**Solution**

$$ \sec(y) = \frac{1}{\cos(y)} $$

$$ \tan(y) = \frac{\sin(y)}{\cos(y)} $$

$$ \cos(y) \neq 0 $$

But within $\left[0, \pi\right]$, there exists $y = \dfrac{\pi}{2}$, and
$\cos\left(\dfrac{\pi}{2}\right) = 0$. Thusly this integrand is not continuous
on the given interval, and we cannot use the Fundamental Theorem Of Calculus to
evaluate this integral.

**9.**
$\displaystyle \int_{1}^{9}{\sqrt{x^5} + \frac{\sin\left(\sqrt{x}\right)}{\sqrt{x}}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \int_{1}^{9}{\sqrt{x^5} + \frac{\sin\left(\sqrt{x}\right)}{\sqrt{x}}\, dx} = \int_{1}^{9}{\sqrt{x^5}\, dx} + \int_{1}^{9}{\frac{\sin\left(\sqrt{x}\right)}{\sqrt{x}}\, dx} $$

$$ u = x^{\frac{1}{2}} \quad du = \frac{1}{2}\left(x^{-\frac{1}{2}}\right)dx \quad \Rightarrow \quad 2du = \left(x^{-\frac{1}{2}}\right)dx $$

$$ x = 1 \quad u = (1)^{\frac{1}{2}} = 1 $$

$$ x = 9 \quad u = (9)^{\frac{1}{2}} = 3 $$

Note we cannot take $\pm$ here because it results in an imaginary number during
evaluation.

$$ \int_{1}^{9}{\sqrt{x^5} + \frac{\sin\left(\sqrt{x}\right)}{\sqrt{x}}\, dx} = \int_{1}^{9}{x^{\frac{5}{2}}\, dx} + 2\int_{1}^{3}{\sin(u)\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \left. \left(\frac{2}{7}\right)\left(x^{\frac{7}{2}}\right) \right|_{1}^{9} + 2 \left. \left(-\cos(u)\right) \right|_{1}^{3} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{2}{7}\left((9)^{\frac{7}{2}} - (1)^{\frac{7}{2}}\right) + 2\left(-\cos(3) - (-\cos(1))\right)$$

$$ \boxed{\quad = \frac{2}{7}\left(9^{\frac{7}{2}} - 1\right) + 2\left(\cos(1) - \cos(3)\right)} $$

**10.** $\displaystyle \int_{0}^{1}{\sec^2(w) - \frac{2}{4w^2 + 1}\, dw}$

**Solution**

$$ \int_{0}^{1}{\sec^2(w) - \frac{2}{4w^2 + 1}\, dw} = \int_{0}^{1}{\sec^2(w)\, dw} - \int_{0}^{1}{\frac{2}{4w^2 + 1}\, dw}  $$

$$ \frac{2}{4w^2 + 1} = (2)\frac{1}{1 + 4w^2} = (2)\frac{1}{1 + (2w)^2} $$

$$ u = 2w \quad du = 2dw \quad \frac{1}{2}du = dw $$

$$ w = 0 \quad u = 2(0) = 0 $$

$$ w = 1 \quad u = 2(1) = 2 $$

$$ \int_{0}^{1}{\sec^2(w) - \frac{2}{4w^2 + 1}\, dw} = \int_{0}^{1}{\sec^2(w)\, dw} - 2\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)\int_{0}^{2}{\frac{1}{1 + u^2}\, du}  $$

$$ \int_{0}^{1}{\sec^2(w) - \frac{2}{4w^2 + 1}\, dw} = \left. \left(\tan(w)\right) \right|_{0}^{1} - \left. \left(\tan^{-1}(w)\right) \right|_{0}^{2} $$

$$ \int_{0}^{1}{\sec^2(w) - \frac{2}{4w^2 + 1}\, dw} = (\tan(1) - \tan(0)) - \left(\tan^{-1}(2) - \tan^{-1}(0)\right)$$

$$ \int_{0}^{1}{\sec^2(w) - \frac{2}{4w^2 + 1}\, dw} = (\tan(1) - 0) - \left(\tan^{-1}(2) - 0\right)$$

$$ \boxed{\int_{0}^{1}{\sec^2(w) - \frac{2}{4w^2 + 1}\, dw} = \tan(1) - \tan^{-1}(2)} $$

**11.**
$\displaystyle \int_{3}^{0}{\mathbf{e}^{-4t}\sqrt{2 + \mathbf{e}^{-4t}} + 8\mathbf{e}^t\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ \int_{3}^{0}{\mathbf{e}^{-4t}\sqrt{2 + \mathbf{e}^{-4t}} + 8\mathbf{e}^t\, dt} = \int_{3}^{0}{\mathbf{e}^{-4t}\sqrt{2 + \mathbf{e}^{-4t}}\, dt} + \int_{3}^{0}{8\mathbf{e}^t\, dt} $$

$$ u = 2 + \mathbf{e}^{-4t} \quad du = \left(-4\mathbf{e}^{-4t}\right)dt \quad \Rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{4}du = \left(\mathbf{e}^{-4t}\right)dt $$

$$ t = 3 \quad u = 2 + \mathbf{e}^{-4(3)} = 2 + \mathbf{e}^{-12} $$

$$ t = 0 \quad u = 2 + \mathbf{e}^{-4(0)} = 3 $$

$$ \int_{3}^{0}{\mathbf{e}^{-4t}\sqrt{2 + \mathbf{e}^{-4t}} + 8\mathbf{e}^t\, dt} = -\frac{1}{4}\int_{2 + \mathbf{e}^{-12}}^{3}{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} + 8\int_{3}^{0}{\mathbf{e}^t\, dt} $$

$$ \quad = -\frac{1}{4} \left. \left(\frac{2}{3}\right)\left(u^{\frac{3}{2}}\right) \right|_{2 + \mathbf{e}^{-12}}^{3} + 8 \left. \left(\mathbf{e}^t\right) \right|_{3}^{0} $$

$$ \boxed{\quad = -\frac{1}{6}\left(3^{\frac{3}{2}} - \left(2 + \mathbf{e}^{-12}\right)^{\frac{3}{2}}\right) + 8\left(1 - \mathbf{e}^{3}\right)} $$

**12.**
$\displaystyle \int_{3}^{7}{\frac{9\mathbf{e}^x}{\mathbf{e}^x + 4} + \frac{\left[\ln(2x)\right]^2}{x}\, dx}$

**Solution**

$$ \int_{3}^{7}{\frac{9\mathbf{e}^x}{\mathbf{e}^x + 4} + \frac{\left[\ln(2x)\right]^2}{x}\, dx} = \int_{3}^{7}{\frac{9\mathbf{e}^x}{\mathbf{e}^x + 4}\, dx} + \int_{3}^{7}{\frac{\left[\ln(2x)\right]^2}{x}\, dx} $$

$$ u = \mathbf{e}^x + 4 \quad du = (\mathbf{e}^{x})dx $$

$$ x = 3 \quad u = \mathbf{e}^{(3)} + 4 = \mathbf{e}^3 + 4 $$

$$ x = 7 \quad u = \mathbf{e}^{(7)} + 4 = \mathbf{e}^7 + 4 $$

$$ v = \ln(2x) \quad dv = 2\left(\frac{1}{2x}\right)dx = \left(\frac{1}{x}\right)dx $$

$$ x = 3 \quad v = \ln(2(3)) =  \ln(6) $$

$$ x = 7 \quad v = \ln(2(7)) = \ln(14) $$

$$ \int_{3}^{7}{\frac{9\mathbf{e}^x}{\mathbf{e}^x + 4} + \frac{\left[\ln(2x)\right]^2}{x}\, dx} = 9\int_{\mathbf{e}^3 + 4}^{\mathbf{e}^7 + 4}{\frac{1}{u}\, du} + \int_{\ln(6)}^{\ln(14)}{v^2\, dv} $$

$$ = 9 \left. \left(\ln|u|\right) \right|_{\mathbf{e}^3 + 4}^{\mathbf{e}^7 + 4} + \left. \left(\frac{1}{3}\right)\left(v^3\right) \right|_{\ln(6)}^{\ln(14)} $$

$$ = 9\left(\ln|\left(\mathbf{e}^7 + 4\right)| - \ln|\left(\mathbf{e}^3 + 4\right)|\right) + \frac{1}{3}\left((\ln(14))^3 - (\ln(6))^3\right) $$

$$ = 9\left(\ln|\left(\mathbf{e}^7 + 4\right)| - \ln|\left(\mathbf{e}^3 + 4\right)|\right) + \frac{1}{3}\left((\ln(14))^3 - (\ln(6))^3\right) $$

$$ = 9\left(\ln\left(\mathbf{e}^7 + 4\right) - \ln\left(\mathbf{e}^3 + 4\right)\right) + \frac{1}{3}\left((\ln(14))^3 - (\ln(6))^3\right) $$

$$ \boxed{= 9\ln\left(\frac{\mathbf{e}^7 + 4}{\mathbf{e}^3 + 4}\right) + \frac{1}{3}\left((\ln(14))^3 - (\ln(6))^3\right)} $$

**13.**
$\displaystyle \int_{0}^{\pi}{\sin\left(\frac{v}{2}\right)\left[6 + 3\cos^2\left(\frac{v}{2}\right) - 4\cos^4\left(\frac{v}{2}\right)\right]\, dv}$

**Solution**

$$ u = \cos\left(\frac{v}{2}\right) \quad du = \left(-\frac{1}{2}\sin\left(\frac{v}{2}\right)\right)dv \quad \Rightarrow \quad -2du = \left(\sin\left(\frac{v}{2}\right)\right)dv $$

$$ v = 0 \quad u = \cos\left(\frac{(0)}{2}\right) = 1 $$

$$ v = \pi \quad u = \cos\left(\frac{(\pi)}{2}\right) = 0 $$

$$ \int_{0}^{\pi}{\sin\left(\frac{v}{2}\right)\left[6 + 3\cos^2\left(\frac{v}{2}\right) - 4\cos^4\left(\frac{v}{2}\right)\right]\, dv} = -2\int_{1}^{0}{6 + 3u^2 - 4u^4\, du} $$

$$ \quad = -2\left(\left. (6u) \right|_{1}^{0} + 3 \left. \left(\frac{1}{3}\right)\left(u^3\right) \right|_{1}^{0} - 4 \left. \left(\frac{1}{5}\right)\left(u^5\right) \right|_{1}^{0}\right) $$

$$ \quad = -2\left[6((0) - (1)) + \left((0)^3 - (1)^3\right) - \frac{4}{5}\left((0)^5 - (1)^5\right)\right] $$

$$ \quad = -2\left[6(-1) + (-1) - \frac{4}{5}(-1)\right] $$

$$ \quad = -2\left[-6 - 1 + \frac{4}{5}\right] $$

$$ \quad = -2\left[-7 + \frac{4}{5}\right] $$

$$ \quad = -2\left[-\frac{31}{5}\right] $$

$$ \boxed{\quad = \frac{62}{5}} $$

**14.**
$\displaystyle \int_{1}^{2}{\mathbf{e}^{-t} + 3t\mathbf{e}^{5 - t^2}\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ \int_{1}^{2}{\mathbf{e}^{-t} + 3t\mathbf{e}^{5 - t^2}\, dt} = \int_{1}^{2}{\mathbf{e}^{-t}\, dt} + \int_{1}^{2}{3t\mathbf{e}^{5 - t^2}\, dt} $$

$$ u = 5 - t^2 \quad du = (-2t)dt \quad \Rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{2}du = tdt $$

$$ t = 1 \quad u = 5 - (1)^2 = 4 $$

$$ t = 2 \quad u = 5 - (2)^2 = 1 $$

$$ \int_{1}^{2}{\mathbf{e}^{-t} + 3t\mathbf{e}^{5 - t^2}\, dt} = \int_{1}^{2}{\mathbf{e}^{-t}\, dt} - \frac{3}{2}\int_{4}^{1}{\mathbf{e}^u\, du}$$

$$ \quad = \left. \left(\mathbf{e}^{-t}\right) \right|_{1}^{2} - \left. \frac{3}{2} \left(\mathbf{e}^u\right) \right|_{4}^{1} $$

$$ \quad = \left(\mathbf{e}^{-(2)} - \mathbf{e}^{-(1)}\right) - \frac{3}{2}\left(\mathbf{e}^{(1)} - \mathbf{e}^{(4)}\right) $$

$$ \quad = \left(\mathbf{e}^{-2} - \mathbf{e}^{-1}\right) - \frac{3}{2}\left(\mathbf{e} - \mathbf{e}^{4}\right) $$

$$ \quad = \frac{3}{2}\left(\mathbf{e}^{4} - \mathbf{e}\right) + \left(\mathbf{e}^{-1} - \mathbf{e}^{-2}\right) $$

**15.**
$\displaystyle \int_{0}^{6}{\frac{8t^3}{2t^4 + 1} - \frac{7t}{t^2 - 9}\, dt}$

**Solution**

$$ t^2 - 9 = 0 $$

$$ t^2 = 9 $$

$$ t = 3 $$

This integral doesn't exist on this range, as $t = 3$ exists within the given
interval of $[0, 6]$, resulting in a division by $0$ error for the second term.
Therefore the given integrand is not continuous on this interval and we cannot
apply The Fundamental Theorem Of Calculus.

**16.**
$\displaystyle \int_{2}^{6}{\sqrt{1 + 2y} + (4 - y)\left(y^2 - 8y + 5\right)^4\, dy}$

**Solution**

$$ \int_{2}^{6}{\sqrt{1 + 2y} + (4 - y)\left(y^2 - 8y + 5\right)^4\, dy} = \int_{2}^{6}{\sqrt{1 + 2y}\, dy} + \int_{2}^{6}{(4 - y)\left(y^2 - 8y + 5\right)^4\, dy} $$

$$ u = 1 + 2y \quad du = (2)dy \quad \Rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{2}du = dy $$

$$ y = 2 \quad u = 1 + 2(2) = 5 $$

$$ y = 6 \quad u = 1 + 2(6) = 13 $$

$$ v = y^2 - 8y + 5 \quad dv = (2y - 8)dy = -2(4 - y)dy \quad \Rightarrow \quad -\frac{1}{2}dv = (4 - y)dy $$

$$ y = 2 \quad v = (2)^2 - 8(2) + 5 = -7 $$

$$ y = 6 \quad v = (6)^2 - 8(6) + 5 = -7 $$

$$ \int_{2}^{6}{\sqrt{1 + 2y} + (4 - y)\left(y^2 - 8y + 5\right)^4\, dy} = \frac{1}{2}\int_{5}^{13}{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} - \frac{1}{2}\int_{-7}^{-7}{v^4\, dv} $$

The second term is just $0$ by property 2 of Definite Integrals (the range is
just $[-7, -7]$).

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\int_{5}^{13}{u^{\frac{1}{2}}\, du} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2} \left. \left(\frac{2}{3}\right)\left(u^{\frac{3}{2}}\right) \right|_{5}^{13} $$

$$ \boxed{\quad = \frac{1}{3}\left(13^{\frac{3}{2}} - 5^{\frac{3}{2}}\right)} $$

**17.**
$\displaystyle \int_{0}^{1}{\mathbf{e}^{2z}\sin\left(\mathbf{e}^{2z} - 1\right) + \sin(z)\mathbf{e}^{2 - \cos(z)}\, dz}$

**Solution**

$$ \int_{0}^{1}{\mathbf{e}^{2z}\sin\left(\mathbf{e}^{2z} - 1\right) + \sin(z)\mathbf{e}^{2 - \cos(z)}\, dz}= \int_{0}^{1}{\mathbf{e}^{2z}\sin\left(\mathbf{e}^{2z} - 1\right)\, dz} + \int_{0}^{1}{\sin(z)\mathbf{e}^{2 - \cos(z)}\, dz} $$

$$ u = \mathbf{e}^{2z} - 1 \quad du = \left(2\mathbf{e}^{2z}\right)dz \quad \Rightarrow \quad \frac{1}{2}du = \left(\mathbf{e}^{2z}\right)dz $$

$$ z = 0 \quad = \mathbf{e}^{2(0)} - 1 = 0 $$

$$ z = 1 \quad = \mathbf{e}^{2(1)} - 1 = \mathbf{e}^2 - 1 $$

$$ v = 2 - \cos(z) \quad dv = (\sin(z))dz $$

$$ z = 0 \quad v = 2 - \cos(0) = 1 $$

$$ z = 1 \quad v = 2 - \cos(1) $$

$$ \int_{0}^{1}{\mathbf{e}^{2z}\sin\left(\mathbf{e}^{2z} - 1\right) + \sin(z)\mathbf{e}^{2 - \cos(z)}\, dz}= \frac{1}{2}\int_{0}^{\mathbf{e}^2 - 1}{\sin(u)\, du} + \int_{1}^{2 - \cos(1)}{\mathbf{e}^v\, dv} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2} \left. \left(-\cos(u)\right) \right|_{0}^{\mathbf{e}^2 - 1} + \left. \left(\mathbf{e}^v\right) \right|_{1}^{2 - \cos(1)} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{1}{2}\left(-\cos\left(\mathbf{e}^2 - 1\right) - (-\cos(0))\right) + \left(\mathbf{e}^{(2 - \cos(1))} - \mathbf{e}^{(1)}\right) $$

$$ \boxed{\quad = \frac{1}{2}\left(1 - \cos\left(\mathbf{e}^2 - 1\right)\right) + \mathbf{e}^{(2 - \cos(1))} - \mathbf{e}} $$
