# 5.2 Zeroes/Roots Of Polynomials

---

We'll start off this section by defining just what a **root** or **zero** of a
polynomial is. Wwe say that $x = r$ is a root or zero of a polynomial, $P(x)$,
if $P(r) = 0$. In other words, $x = r$ is a root or zero of a polynomial if it
is a solution to the equation $P(x) = 0$.

In the next couple of sections we will need to find all the zeroes for a given
polynomial. So, before we get into that we need to get some ideas out of the way
regarding zeroes of polynomials that will help us in that process.

The process of finding the zeroes of $P(x)$ really amount to nothing more than
solving the equation $P(x) = 0$ and we already know how to do that for second
degree (quadratic) polynomials. So, to help illustrate some of the ideas were
going to be looking at let’s get the zeroes of a couple of second degree
polynomials.

Let’s first find the zeroes for $P(x) = x^2 + 2x − 15$. To do this we simply
solve the following equation.

$$ x^2 + 2x - 15 = (x + 5)(x - 3) = 0 \Rightarrow x = -5, x = 3 $$

So, this second degree polynomial has two zeroes or roots.

Now, let's find the zeroes for $P(x) = x^2 - 14x + 49$. That will mean solving,

$$ x^2 - 14x + 49 = (x - 7)^2 = 0 \Rightarrow x = 7 $$

So, this second degree polynomial has a single zero or root. Also, recall that
when we first looked at these we called a root like this a **double root**.

We solved each of these by first factoring the polynomial and then using the
[zero factor property](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/Alg/SolveQuadraticEqnsI.aspx)
on the factored form. When we first looked at the zero factor property we saw
that it said that if the product of two terms was zero then one of the terms had
to be zero to start off with.

The zero factor property can be extended out to as many terms as we need. In
other words, if we’ve got a product of $n$ terms that is equal to zero, then at
least one of them had to be zero to start off with. So, if we could factor
higher degree polynomials we could then solve these as well.

Let's take a look at a couple of these.

---

**Example 1**

Find the zeroes of each of the following polynomials.

In each of these the factoring has been done for us. Do not worry about
factoring anything like this. You won’t be asked to do any factoring of this
kind anywhere in this material. There are only here to make the point that the
zero factor property works here as well. We will also use these in a later
example.

**(a)**

$$ P(x) = 5x^5 - 20x^4 + 5x^3 + 50x^2 - 20x - 40 = 5(x + 1)^2(x - 2)^3 $$

Okay, in this case we do have a product of 3 terms however the first is a
constant and will not make the polynomial zero. So, from the final two terms it
looks like the polynomial will be zero for $x = −1$ and $x = 2$. Therefore, the
zeroes of this polynomial are,

$$ x = -1 \text{ and } x = 2 $$

**(b)**

$$ Q(x) = x^8 - 4x^7 - 18x^6 + 108x^5 - 135x^4 = x^4(x - 3)^3(x + 5) $$

We’ve also got a product of three terms in this polynomial. However, since the
first is now an $x$ this will introduce a third zero. The zeroes for this
polynomial are,

$$ x = -5, x = 0, \text{ and } x = 3 $$

because each of these will make one of the terms, and hence the whole
polynomial, zero.

**(c\)**

$$ R(x) = x^7 + 10x^6 + 27x^5 - 57x^3 - 30x^2 + 29x + 20 = (x + 1)^3(x - 1)^2(x + 5)(x + 4) $$

With this polynomial we have four terms and the zeroes here are,

$$ x = -5, x = -1, x = 1, \text{ and } x = -4 $$

---

Now, we’ve got some terminology to get out of the way. If $r$ is a zero of a
polynomial and the exponent on the term that produced the root is $k$ then we
say that $r$ has **multiplicity** $k$. Zeroes with a multiplicity of 1 are often
called **simple** zeroes.

For example, the polynomial $P(x) = x^2 - 10x + 25 = (x - 5)^2$ will have one
zero, $x = 5$, and its multiplicity is 2. In some ways we can think of this zero
as occurring twice in the list of all zeroes since we could write the polynomial
as,

$$ P(x) = x^2 - 10x + 25 = (x - 5)(x - 5) $$

Written this way the term $x - 5$ shows up twice and each term gives the same
zero, $x = 5$. Saying that the multiplicity of zero is $k$ is just a shorthnad
to acknowledge that the zero will occur $k$ times in the list of all zeroes.

---

**Example 2**

List the multiplicities of the zeroes of each of the following polynomials.

We’ve already determined the zeroes of each of these in previous work or
examples in this section so we won’t redo that work. In each case we will simply
write down the previously found zeroes and then go back to the factored form of
the polynomial, look at the exponent on each term and give the multiplicity.

**(a)**

$$ P(x) = x^2 + 2x - 15 $$

In this case we've got two simple zeroes: $x = -5$, $x = 3$.

**(b)**

$$ P(x) = x^2 - 14x + 49 $$

Here $x = 7$ is a zero of multiplicity 2.

**(c\)**

$$ P(x) = 5x^5 - 20x^4 + 5x^3 + 50x^2 - 20x - 40 = 5(x + 1)^2(x - 2)^3 $$

There are two zeroes for this polynomial: $x = -1$ with multiplicity 2 and $x =
2$ with multiplicity 3.

**(d)**

$$ Q(x) = x^8 - 4x^7 - 18x^6 + 108x^5 - 135x^4 = x^4(x - 3)^3(x + 5) $$

We have three zeroes in this case: $x = -5$ which is simple, $x = 0$ with
multiplicity of 4 and $x = 3$ with multiplicity 3.

**(e)**

$$ R(x) = x^7 + 10x^6 + 27x^5 - 57x^3 - 30x^2 + 29x + 20 = (x + 1)^3(x - 1)^2(x + 5)(x + 4) $$

In the final case we've got four zeroes. $x = -5$ which is simple, $x = -1$ with
a multiplicity of 3, $x = 1$ with a multiplicity 2 and $x = -4$ which is simple.

---

This example leads us to several nice facts about polynomials. Here is the first
and probably the most important.

**Fundamental Theorem of Algebra**

> If $P(x)$ is a polynomial of degree $n$ then $P(x)$ will have exactly $n$
> zeroes, some of which may repeat.

This fact says that if you list out all the zeroes and listing each one $k$
times where $k$ is its multiplicity you will have exactly $n$ numbers in the
list. Another way to say this fact is that the multiplicity of all the zeroes
must add to the degree of the polynomial.

We can go back to the previous example and verify that this fact is true for the
polynomials listed there.

This will be a nice fact in a couple of sections when we go into detail about
finding all the zeroes of a polynomial. If we know an upper bound for the number
of zeroes for a polynomial then we will know when we’ve found all of them and so
we can stop looking.

Note as well that some of the zeroes may be complex. In this section we have
worked with polynomials that only have real zeroes but do not let that lead you
to the idea that this theorem will only apply to real zeroes. It is completely
possible that complex zeroes will show up in the list of zeroes.

The next fact is also very useful at times.

**The Factor Theorem**

> For the polynomial $P(x)$,
>
> 1. If $r$ is a zero of $P(x)$ then $x - r$ will be a factor of $P(x)$.
> 2. If $x - r$ is a factor of $P(x)$ then $r$ will be a zero of $P(x)$.

Again, if we go back to the previous example we can see that this is verified
with the polynomials listed there.

The factor theorem leads to the following fact.

**Fact 1**

> If $P(x)$ is a polynomial of degree $n$ and $r$ is a zero of $P(x)$ then
> $P(x)$ can be written in the following form.
>
> $$ P(x) = (x - r)Q(x) $$
>
> where $Q(x)$ is a polynomial with degree $n - 1$. $Q(x)$ can be found by
> dividing $P(x)$ by $x - r$.

There is one more fact that we need to get out of the way.

**Fact 2**

> If $P(x) = (x - r)Q(x)$ and $x = t$ is a zero of $Q(x)$ then $x = t$ will also
> be a zero of $P(x)$.

This fact is easy enough to verify directly. First, if $x = t$ is a zero of
$Q(x)$ then we know that,

$$ Q(t) = 0 $$

since that is what it means to be a zero. So, if $x = t$ is to be a zero of
$P(x)$ then all we need to do is show that $P(t) = 0$ and that's actually quite
simple. Here it is,

$$ P(t) = (t - r)Q(t) = (t - r)(0) = 0 $$

and so $x = t$ is a zero of $P(x)$.

Let's work an example to see how these last few facts can be of use to us.

---

**Example 3**

Given that $x = 2$ is a zero of $P(x) = x^3 + 2x^2 - 5x - 6$ find the other two
zeroes.

First, notice that we really can say the other two since we know that this is a
third degree polynomial and so by The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra we will
have exactly 3 zeroes, with some repeats possible.

So, since we know that $x = 2$ is a zero of $P(x) = x^3 + 2x^2 - 5x - 6$ the
Fact 1 tells us that we can write $P(x)$ as,

$$ P(x) = (x - 2)Q(x) $$

and $Q(x)$ will be a quadratic polynomial. Then we can find the zeroes of $Q(x)$
by any of the methods that we've looked at to this point and by Fact 2 we know
that the two zeroes we get from $Q(x)$ will also be zeros of $P(x)$. At this
point we'll have 3 zeroes and so we will be done.

So, let's find $Q(x)$. Todo this all we need to do is a quick synthetic division
as follows.

| $r$ | $x^3$ | $x^2$ | $x$ | $R$ |
| --- | ----- | ----- | --- | --- |
| 2   | 1     | 2     | -5  | -6  |
|     |       | 2     | 8   | 6   |
|     | 1     | 4     | 3   | 0   |

Before writing down $Q(x)$ recall that the final number in the third row is the
remainder and that we know that $P(2)$ must be equal to this number. So, in this
case we have that $P(2) = 0$ . If you think about it, we should already know
this to be true. We were given in the problem statement the fact that $x = 2$ is
a zero of $P(x)$ and that means that we must have $P(2) = 0$.

So, why go on about this? This is a great check of our synthetic division. Since
we know that $x = 2$ is a zero of $P(x)$ and if we get any other number than
zero in that last entry we will know that we've done something wrong and we can
go back and find the mistake.

Now, let's get back to the problem. From the synthetic division we have,

$$ P(x) = (x - 2) (x^2 + 4x + 3) $$

So, this means that,

$$ Q(x) = x^2 + 4x + 3 $$

and we can find the zeroes of this. Here they are,

$$ Q(x) = x^2 + 4x + 3 = (x + 3)(x + 1) \Rightarrow x = -3, x = -1 $$

So, the three zeroes of $P(x)$ are $x = -3$, $x = -1$ and $x = 2$.

As an aside to the previous example notice that we can also now completely
factor the polynomial $P(x) = x^3 + 2x^2 - 5x -6$. Substituting the factored
form of $Q(x)$ into $P(x$) we get,

$$ P(x) = (x - 2)(x + 3)(x + 1) $$

This is how the polynomials in the first set of examples were factored by the
way. Those require a little more work than this, but they can be done in the
same manner.

---

## Practice Problems

For problems 1 - 3 list all of the zeroes of the polynomial and give their
multiplicities.

**1.**

$$ f(x) = 2x^2 + 13x - 7 $$

**2.**

$$ g(x) = x^6 - 3x^5 - 6x^4 + 10x^3 + 21x^2 + 9x = x(x - 3)^2(x + 1)^3 $$

**3.**

$$ A(x) = x^8 + 2x^7 - 29x^6 - 76x^5 + 199x^4 + 722x^3 + 261x^2 - 648x - 432 = (x + 1)^2(x - 4)^2(x - 1)(x + 3)^3 $$

For problems 4 - 6 $x = r$ is a root of the given polynomial. Find the other two
roots and write the polynomial in fully factored form.

**4.**

$$ P(x) = x^3 - 6x^2 - 16; r = -2 $$

**5.**

$$ P(x) = x^3 - 7x^2 - 6x + 72; r = 4 $$

**6.**

$$ P(x) = 3x^3 + 16x^2 - 33x + 14; r = -7 $$

---

## Assignment Problems

For problems 1 – 6 list all of the zeros of the polynomial and give their
multiplicities.

**1.**

$$ f(x) = x^2 + 2x - 120 $$

**2.**

$$ R(x) = x^2 + 12x + 32 $$

**3.**

$$ h(x) = 4x^3 + x^2 - 3x $$

**4.**

$$ A(x) = x^5 + 2x^4 - 35x^3 + 92x^2 - 92x + 32 = (x - 1)^2(x + 8)(x - 2)^2 $$

**5.**

$$ Q(x) = x^{10} + 17x^9 + 115x^8 + 387x^7 + 648x^6 + 432x^5 = x^5(x + 3)^3(x + 4)^2 $$

**6.**

$$ g(x) = x^8 + 2x^7 - 14x^6 - 16x^5 + 49x^4 + 62x^3 - 44x^2 - 88x - 32 = (x + 4)(x + 1)^4(x - 2)^3 $$

For problems 7 – 11 $x = r$ is a root of the given polynomial. Find the other
two roots and write the polynomial in fully factored form.

**7.**

$$ P(x) = x^4 - 3x^3 - 18x^2; r = 6 $$

**8.**

$$ P(x) = x^3 + x^2 - 46x + 80; r = -8 $$

**9.**

$$ P(x) = x^3 - 9x^2 + 26x - 24; r = 3 $$

**10.**

$$ P(x) = 12x^3 + 13x^2 - 1; r = -1 $$

**11.**

$$ P(x) = 4x^3 + 11x^2 - 134x - 105; r = 5 $$

For problems 12 – 14 determine the smallest possible degree for a polynomial
with the given zeros and their multiplicities.

**12.** $r_1 = -2$ (multiplicity 1), $r_2 = 1$ (multiplicity 1), $r_3 = 4$
(multiplicity 1)

**13.** $r_1 = 3$ (multiplicity 4), $r_2 = -5$ (multiplicity 1)

**14.** $r_1 = 7$ (multiplicity 2), $r_2 = 4$ (multiplicity 7), $r_3 = -10$
(multiplicity 5)

**15.** A 7th degree polynomial has roots $r_1 = -9$ (multiplicity 2) and $r_2 =
3$ (multiplicity 1). What is the maximum number of remaining roots for the
polynomial?
