# 5.4 Finding Zeroes Of Polynomials

---

We’ve been talking about zeroes of polynomial and why we need them for a couple
of sections now. We haven’t, however, really talked about how to actually find
them for polynomials of degree greater than two. That is the topic of this
section. Well, that’s kind of the topic of this section. In general, finding all
the zeroes of any polynomial is a fairly difficult process. In this section we
will give a process that will find all rational (_i.e._ integer or fractional)
zeroes of a polynomial. We will be able to use the process for finding all the
zeroes of a polynomial provided all but at most two of the zeroes are rational.
If more than two of the zeroes are not rational then this process will not find
all of the zeroes.

We will need the following theorem to get us started on this process.

**Rational Root Theorem**

> If the rational number $x = \dfrac{b}{c}$ is zero of the $n$<sup>th</sup>
> degree polynomial,
>
> $$ P(x) = sx^n + \dots + t $$
>
> where all the coefficients are integers then $b$ will be a factor of $t$ and
> $c$ will be a factor of $s$.

Note that in order for this theorem to work then the zero must be reduced to
lowest terms. In other words, it will work for $\dfrac{4}{3}$ but not
necessarily for $\dfrac{20}{15}$.

Let's verify the results of this theorem with an example.

---

**Exampple 1**

Verify that the roots of the following polynomial satisfy the rational root
theorem.

$$ P(x) = 12x^3 - 41x^2 - 38x + 40 = (x - 4)(3x - 2)(4x + 5) $$

From the factored form we can see that the zeroes are,

$$ x = 4 = \frac{4}{1} $$

$$ x = \frac{2}{3} $$

$$ x = -\frac{5}{4} $$

Notce that we wrote the integer as a fraction to fit into the theorem. Also,
with the negative zero we can put the negative onto the numerator or
denominator. It won't matter.

So, according to the rational root theorem the numerators of these fractions
(with or without the minus sign on the third zero) must all be factors of 40 and
the denominators must all be factors of 12.

Here are several ways to factor 40 and 12.

$$ 40 = (4)(10) \text{ and } 12 = (1)(12) $$

$$ 40 = (2)(20) \text{ and } 12 = (3)(4) $$

$$ 40 = (5)(8) \text { and } 12 = (-3)(-4) $$

$$ 40 = (-5)(-8) $$

From these we can see that in fact the numerators are all factors of 40 and the
denominators are all factors of 12. Also note that, as shown, we can put the
minus sign on the third zero on either the numerator or the denomiantor and it
will still be a factor of the appropriate number.

---

So, why is this theorem so useful? Well, for starters it will allow us to write
down a list of _possible_ rational zeroes for a polynomial and more importantly,
any rational zeroes of a polynomial WILL be in this list.

In other words, we can quickly determine all the rational zeroes of a polynomial
simply by checking all the numbers in our list.

Before getting into the process of finding the zeroes of a polynomial let’s see
how to come up with a list of possible rational zeroes for a polynomial.

---

**Example 2**

Find a list of all possible rational zeroes for each of the following
polynomials.

**(a)**

$$ P(x) = x^4 - 7x^3 + 17x^2 - 17x + 6 $$

Now, just what does the rational root theorem say? It says that if
$x = \dfrac{b}{c}$ is to be a zero of $P(x)$ then $b$ must be a factor of $6$
and $c$ must be a factor of $1$. Also, as we saw in the previous example we
can’t forget negative factors.

So, the first thing to do is actually to list all possible factors of $1$ and
$6$. Here they are.

$$ 6 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 6 $$

$$ 1 \text{ : } \pm 1 $$

Now, to get a list of possible rational zeroes of the polynomial all we need to
do is write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers
where the numerators must be factors of $6$ and the denominators must be factors
of $1$. This is actually easier than it might at first appear to be.

There is a very simple shorthanded way of doing this. Let’s go through the first
one in detail then we’ll do the rest quicker. First, take the first factor from
the numerator list, including the $\pm$, and divide this by the first factor
(okay, only factor in this case) from the denominator list, again including the
$\pm$. Doing this gives,

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} $$

This looks like a mess, but it isn’t too bad. There are four fractions here.
They are,

$$ \frac{+1}{+1} = 1 \quad \frac{+1}{-1} = -1 \quad \frac{-1}{+1} = -1 \quad \frac{-1}{-1} = 1 $$

Notice however, that the four fractions all reduce down to two possible numbers.
This will always happen with these kinds of fractions. What we’ll do from now on
is form the fraction, do any simplification of the numbers, ignoring the $\pm$,
and then drop one of the $\pm$.

So, the list possible rational zeroes for this polynomial is,

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 1} = \pm 6 $$

So, it looks there are only 8 possible rational zeroes and in this case they are
all integers. Note as well that any rational zeroes of this polynomial WILL be
somewhere in this list, although we haven’t found them yet.

**(b)**

$$ P(x) = 2x^4 + x^3 + 3x^2 + 3x - 9 $$

We’ll not put quite as much detail into this one. First get a list of all
factors of $-9$ and $2$. Note that the minus sign on the $9$ isn’t really all
that important since we will still get a $\pm$ on each of the factors.

$$ -9 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 3, \pm 9 $$

$$ 2 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2 $$

Now, the factors of $-9$ are all the possible numerators and the factors of $2$
are all the possible denominators.

Here then is a list of all possible rational zeroes of this polynomial.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 1} = \pm 9 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{3}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{9}{2} $$

So, we've got a total of 12 possible rational zeroes, half are integers and half
are fractions.

---

The following fact will also be useful on occasion in finding the zeroes of a
polynomial.

**Fact**

> If $P(x)$ is a polynomial and we know that $P(a) > 0$ and $P(b) < 0$ then
> somewhere between $a$ and $b$ is a zero of $P(x)$.

What this fact is telling us is that if we evaluate the polynomial at two points
and one of the evaluations gives a positive value (_i.e._ the point is above the
$x$-axis) and the other evaluation gives a negative value (_i.e._ the point is
below the $x$-axis), then the only way to get from one point to the other is to
go through the $x$-axis. Or, in other words, the polynomial must have a zero,
since we know that zeroes are where a graph touches or crosses the $x$-axis.

Note that this fact doesn’t tell us what the zero is, it only tells us that one
will exist. Also, note that if both evaluations are positive or both evaluations
are negative there may or may not be a zero between them.

Here is the process for determining all the rational zeroes of a polynomial.

**Process for Finding Rational Zeroes**

> 1. Use the rational root theorem to list all possible zeroes of the polynomial
>    $P(x)$.
> 2. Evaluate the polynomial at the numbers from the first step until we find
>    zero. Let's suppose the zero is $x = r$, then we will know that it's a zero
>    because $P(r) = 0$. Once this has been determined that it is in fact a zero
>    write the original polynomial as
>
> $$ P(x) = (x - r)Q(x) $$
>
> 3. Repeat the process using $Q(x)$ this time instead of $P(x)$. This repeating
>    will continue until we reach a second degree polynomial. At this point we
>    can solve this directly for the remaining zeroes.

To simplify the second step we will use synthetic division. This will greatly
simplify our life in several ways. First, recall that the last number in the
final row is the polynomial evaluated at $r$ and if we do get a zero the
remaining numbers in the final row are the coefficients for $Q(x)$ and so we
won’t have to go back and find that.

Also, in the evaluation step it is usually easiest to evaluate at the possible
integer zeroes first and then go back and deal with any fractions if we have to.

Let’s see how this works.

---

**Example 3**

Determine all the zeroes of $P(x) = x^4 - 7x^3 + 17x^2 - 17x + 6$.

We found the list of all possible rational zeroes in the previous example. Here
they are.

$$ \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 6 $$

We now need to start evaluating the polynomial at these numbers. We can start
anywhere in the list and will continue until we find zero.

To do the evaluations we will build a **synthetic division table**. In a
synthetic division table do the multiplications in our head and drop the middle
row just writing down the third row and since we will be going through the
process multiple times we put all the rows into a table.

Here is the first synthetic division table for this problem.

|      | $1$ | $-7$ | $17$ | $-17$ | $6$                        |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | ----- | -------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $1$ | $-8$ | $25$ | $-42$ | $48 = P(-1) \neq 0$        |
| $1$  | $1$ | $-6$ | $11$ | $-6$  | $0 = P(1) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

So, we found a zero. Before getting into that let’s recap the computations here
to make sure you can do them.

The top row is the coefficients from the polynomial and the first column is the
numbers that we’re evaluating the polynomial at.

Each row (after the first) is the third row from the
[synthetic division process](https://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/Alg/DividingPolynomials.aspx).
Let’s quickly look at the first couple of numbers in the second row. The number
in the second column is the first coefficient dropped down. The number in the
third column is then found by multiplying the -1 by 1 and adding to the -7. This
gives the -8. For the fourth number is then -1 times -8 added onto 17. This is
25, etc.

You can do regular synthetic division if you need to, but it’s a good idea to be
able to do these tables as it can help with the process.

Okay, back to the problem. We now know that $x = 1$ is a zero and so we can
write the polynomial as,

$$ P(x) = x^4 - 7x^3 + 17x^2 - 17x + 6 = (x - 1)(x^3 - 6x^2 + 11x - 6) $$

Now we need to repeat this process with the polynomial
$Q(x) = x^3 − 6x^2 + 11x − 6$. So, the first thing to do is to write down all
possible rational roots of this polynomial and in this case we’re lucky enough
to have the first and last numbers in this polynomial be the same as the
original polynomial, that usually won’t happen so don’t always expect it. Here
is the list of all possible rational zeroes of this polynomial.

$$ \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 6 $$

Now, before doing a new synthetic division table let’s recall that we are
looking for zeroes to $P(x)$ and from our first division table we determined
that $x = −1$ is NOT a zero of $P(x)$ and so there is no reason to bother with
that number again.

This is something that we should always do at this step. Take a look at the list
of new possible rational zeros and ask are there any that can’t be rational
zeroes of the original polynomial. If there are some, throw them out as we will
already know that they won’t work. So, a reduced list of numbers to try here is,

$$ 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 6 $$

Note that we do need to include $x = 1$ in the list since it is possible for a
zero to occur more that once (_i.e._ multiplicity greater than one).

Here is the synthetic division table for this polynomial.

|     | $1$ | $-6$ | $11$ | $-6$                       |
| --- | --- | ---- | ---- | -------------------------- |
| $1$ | $1$ | $-5$ | $6$  | $0 = P(1) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

So, $x = 1$ is also a zero of $Q(x)$ and we can now write $Q(x)$ as,

$$ Q(x) = x^3 - 6x^2 + 11x - 6 = (x - 1)(x^2 - 5x + 6) $$

Now, technically we could continue the process with $x^2 − 5x + 6$, but this is
a quadratic equation and we know how to find zeroes of these without a
complicated process like this so let’s just solve this like we normally would.

$$ x^2 - 5x + 6 = (x - 2)(x - 3) = 0 \Rightarrow x = 2, x = 3 $$

Note that these two numbers are in the list of possible rational zeroes.

Finishing up this problem then gives the following list of zeroes for $P(x)$.

$$ x = 1 \text{ (multiplicity } 2\text{)} $$

$$ x = 2 \text{ (multiplicity } 1\text{)} $$

$$ x = 3 \text{ (multiplicity } 1\text{)} $$

Note that $x = 1$ has a multiplicity of 2 since it showed up twice in our work
above.

---

Before moving onto the next example let's also note that we can now completely
factor the polynomial $P(x) = x^4 - 7x^3 + 17x^2 - 17x + 6$. We know that each
zero will give a factor in the factored form and that the exponent on the factor
will be the multiplicity of that zero. So, the factored form is,

$$ P(x) = x^4 - 7x^3 + 17x^2 - 17x + 6 = (x - 1)^2(x - 2)(x - 3) $$

Let's take a look at another example.

---

**Example 4**

Find all the zeroes of $P(x) = 2x^4 + x^3 + 3x^2 + 3x - 9$.

From the second example we know that the list of all possible rational zeroes
is,

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 1} = \pm 9 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{3}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{9}{2} $$

The next step is to build up the synthetic division table. When we’ve got
fractions it’s usually best to start with the integers and do those first. Also,
this time we’ll start with doing all the negative integers first. We are doing
this to make a point on how we can use the fact given above to help us identify
zeroes.

|      | $2$ | $1$   | $3$   | $3$     | $-9$                   |
| ---- | --- | ----- | ----- | ------- | ---------------------- |
| $-9$ | $2$ | $-17$ | $156$ | $-1401$ | $12600 = P(-9) \neq 0$ |
| $-3$ | $2$ | $-5$  | $18$  | $-51$   | $144 = P(-3) \neq 0$   |
| $-1$ | $2$ | $-1$  | $4$   | $-1$    | $-8 = P(-1) \neq 0$    |

Now, we haven't found a zero yet, however let's notice that $P(-3) = 144 > 0$
and $P(-1) = -8 < 0$ and so by the fact above we know that there must be a zero
somewhere betwee $x = -3$ and $x = -1$. Now, we can also notice that $x =
-\dfrac{3}{2} = - 1.5$ is in this range and is the only number in our list that
is in this range and so there is a chance that this is zero. Let's run through
synthetic divisioin real quick to check and see if it's a zero and to get the
coefficients for $Q(x)$ if it is a zero.

|                 | $2$ | $1$  | $3$ | $3$  | $-9$ |
| --------------- | --- | ---- | --- | ---- | ---- |
| $-\dfrac{3}{2}$ | $2$ | $-2$ | $6$ | $-6$ | $0$  |

So, we got a zero in the final spot which tells us that this was a zero and
$Q(x)$ is,

$$ Q(x) = 2x^3 - 2x^2 + 6x - 6 $$

We now need to repeat the whole process with this polynomial. Also, unlike the
previous example we can't just reuse the original list since the last number is
different this time. So, here are the factors of -6 and 2.

$$ -6 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 6 $$

$$ 2 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2 $$

Here is a list of all possible rational zeroes for $Q(x)$.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 1} = \pm 6 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 2} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{3}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 2} = \pm 3 $$

Notice that some of the numbers appear in both rows and so we can shorten the
list by only writing them down once. Also, remember that we are looking for
zeroes of $P(x)$ and so we can exclude any number in this list that isn’t also
in the original list we gave for $P(x)$. So, excluding previously checked
numbers that were not zeros of $P(x)$ as well as those that aren’t in the
original list gives the following list of possible number that we’ll need to
check.

$$ 1, 3, \pm \frac{1}{2}, \pm \frac{3}{2} $$

Again, we've already checked $x = -3$ and $x = -1$ and know that they aren't
zeroes so there is no reason to recheck them. Let's again start with the
integers and see what we get.

So, $x = 1$ is a zero of $Q(x)$ and we can now write $Q(x)$ as,

$$ Q(x) = 2x^3 - 2x^2 + 6x - 6 = (x - 1)(2x^2 + 6) $$

and as with the previous example we can solve the quadratic by other means.

$$ 2x^2 + 6 = 0 $$

$$ x^2 = -3 $$

$$ x = \pm \sqrt{3}i $$

So, in this case we get a couple of complex zeroes. That can happen.

here is a complete list of all the zeroes for $P(x)$ and note that they all have
multiplicity of one.

$$ x = -\frac{3}{2}, x = 1, x = -\sqrt{3}i, x = \sqrt{3}i $$

---

So, as you can see this is a fairly lengthy process and we only did the work for
two 4<sup>th</sup> degree polynomials. The larger the degree the longer and more
complicated the process. With that being said, however, it is sometimes a
process that we've got to go through to get zeroes of a polynomial.

---

## Practice Problems

Find all the zeroes of the following polynomials.

**1.**

$$ f(x) = 2x^3 - 13x^2 + 3x + 18 $$

List all possible factors of the first and last term:

$$ 18 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 6, \pm 9, \pm 18 $$

$$ 2 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2 $$

Write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers where the
numerators must be factors of the last term and the denominators must be factors
of the first term.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 1} = \pm 6 \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 1} = \pm 9 \quad \frac{\pm 18}{\pm 1} = \pm 18 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 2} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{3}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 2} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{9}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 18}{\pm 2} = \pm 9 $$

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

|      | $2$ | $-13$ | $3$  | $18$                        |
| ---- | --- | ----- | ---- | --------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $2$ | $-15$ | $18$ | $0 = f(-1) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

Knowing that $-1$ is zero, we can write our polynomial as:

$$ f(x) = 2x^3 - 13x^2 + 3x + 18 = (x + 1)(2x^2 - 15x + 18) $$

We could continue, but the solving the remaining quadratic is easier:

$$ f(x) = 2x^3 - 13x^2 + 3x + 18 = (x + 1)(2x - 3)(x - 6) $$

Thusly the fully factored form we get the following set of zeroes for the
original polynomial:

$$ x = -1 \quad x = \frac{3}{2} \quad x = 6 $$

**2.**

$$ P(x) = x^4 - 3x^3 - 5x^2 + 3x + 4 $$

List all possible factors of the first and last term:

$$ 4 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 4 $$

$$ 1 \text{ : } \pm 1 $$

Write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers where the
numerators must be factors of the last term and the denominators must be factors
of the first term.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 1} = \pm 4 $$

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

$$ P(x) = x^4 - 3x^3 - 5x^2 + 3x + 4 $$

|      | $1$ | $-3$ | $-5$ | $3$ | $4$ |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | --- | --- |
| $-1$ | $1$ | $-4$ | $-1$ | $4$ | $0$ |

Once a zero is found, rewrite the original polynomial with this zero as a
factor.

$$ P(x) = x^4 - 3x^3 - 5x^2 + 3x + 4 = (x + 1)(x^3 - 4x^2 - x + 4) $$

Repeat if necessary or use quadratic form to solve for the remaining zeroes.

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

|      | $1$ | $-4$ | $-1$ | $4$ |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | --- |
| $-1$ | $1$ | $-5$ | $4$  | $0$ |

Once a zero is found, rewrite the original polynomial with this zero as a
factor.

$$ P(x) = x^4 - 3x^3 - 5x^2 + 3x + 4 = (x + 1)(x^3 - 4x^2 - x + 4) = (x + 1)(x + 1)(x^2 - 5x + 4) $$

$$ P(x) = x^4 - 3x^3 - 5x^2 + 3x + 4 = (x + 1)(x^3 - 4x^2 - x + 4) = (x + 1)^2(x - 4)(x - 1) $$

List all zeroes with their multiplicities.

$$ x = -1 \text{ (multiplicity } 2 \text{)} \quad x = 1 \quad x = 4 $$

**3.**

$$ A(x) = 2x^4 - 7x^3 - 2x^2 + 28x - 24 $$

List all possible factors of the first and last term:

$$ -24 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 4, \pm 6, \pm 8, \pm 12, \pm 24 $$

$$ 2 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2 $$

Write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers where the
numerators must be factors of the last term and the denominators must be factors
of the first term.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \frac{\pm 4}{ \pm 1} = \pm 4 \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 1} = \pm 6 \quad \frac{\pm 8}{\pm 1} = \pm 8 \quad \frac{\pm 12}{\pm 1} = \pm 12 \quad \frac{\pm 24}{\pm 1} = \pm 24 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 2} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{3}{2} \frac{\pm 4}{ \pm 2} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 2} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 8}{\pm 2} = \pm 4 \quad \frac{\pm 12}{\pm 2} = \pm 6 \quad \frac{\pm 24}{\pm 2} = \pm 12 $$

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

$$ A(x) = 2x^4 - 7x^3 - 2x^2 + 28x - 24 $$

|      | $2$ | $-7$  | $-2$ | $28$  | $-24$                       |
| ---- | --- | ----- | ---- | ----- | --------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $2$ | $-9$  | $7$  | $21$  | $-45 = A(-1) \neq 0$        |
| $1$  | $2$ | $-5$  | $-7$ | $21$  | $-3 = A(1) \neq 0$          |
| $-2$ | $2$ | $-11$ | $20$ | $-12$ | $0 = A(-2) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

Once a zero is found, rewrite the original polynomial with this zero as a
factor.

$$ A(x) = 2x^4 - 7x^3 - 2x^2 + 28x - 24 = (x + 2)(2x^3 - 11x^2 + 20x - 12) $$

Repeat if necessary or use quadratic form to solve for the remaining zeroes.

$$ -12 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 4, \pm 6, \pm 12 $$

$$ 2 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2 $$

$$ 2x^3 - 11x^2 + 20x - 12 $$

|      | $2$ | $-11$ | $20$ | $-12$                      |
| ---- | --- | ----- | ---- | -------------------------- |
| $-2$ | $2$ | $-15$ | $50$ | $-112 = Q(-2) \neq 0$      |
| $2$  | $2$ | $-7$  | $6$  | $0 = Q(2) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

$$ A(x) = 2x^4 - 7x^3 - 2x^2 + 28x - 24 = (x + 2)(x - 2)(2x^2 - 7x + 6) $$

$$ A(x) = 2x^4 - 7x^3 - 2x^2 + 28x - 24 = (x + 2)(x - 2)(2x - 3)(x - 2) $$

$$ A(x) = 2x^4 - 7x^3 - 2x^2 + 28x - 24 = (x + 2)(x - 2)^2(2x - 3) $$

List all zeroes.

$$ x = -2 \quad x = \frac{3}{2} \quad x = 2 \text{ (multiplicity } 2 \text{)} $$

**4.**

$$ g(x) = 8x^5 + 36x^4 + 46x^3 + 7x^2 - 12x - 4 $$

List all possible factors of the first and last term:

$$ -4: \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 4 $$

$$ 8: \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 4, \pm 8 $$

Write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers where the
numerators must be factors of the last term and the denominators must be factors
of the first term.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 1} = \pm
4 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 2} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 2} = \pm 2 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{1}{4} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 4} = \pm 1 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 8} = \pm \frac{1}{8} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 8} = \pm \frac{1}{4} \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 8} = \pm \frac{1}{2} $$

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

$$ g(x) = 8x^5 + 36x^4 + 46x^3 + 7x^2 - 12x - 4 $$

|      | $8$ | $36$ | $46$ | $7$   | $-12$ | $-4$                |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | ----- | ----- | ------------------- |
| $-1$ | $8$ | $28$ | $18$ | $-11$ | $-1$  | $-3 = g(-1) \neq 0$ |
| $1$  | $8$ | $44$ | $90$ | $97$  | $85$  | $81 = g(1) \neq 0$  |

$-3$ and $81$ have opposite signs, indicating that we have a zero inbetween $-1$
and $1$. Let's look at our fractions above that lie inbetwee $-1$ and $1$.

|                 | $8$ | $36$ | $46$ | $7$  | $-12$ | $-4$                                   |
| --------------- | --- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ----- | -------------------------------------- |
| $-\dfrac{1}{2}$ | $8$ | $32$ | $30$ | $-8$ | $-8$  | $0 = g(-\dfrac{1}{2}) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

Once a zero is found, rewrite the original polynomial with this zero as a
factor.

$$ g(x) = 8x^5 + 36x^4 + 46x^3 + 7x^2 - 12x - 4 = \left(x + \frac{1}{2}\right)(8x^4 + 32x^3 + 30x^2 - 8x^2 - 8) $$

Repeat if necessary or use quadratic form to solve for the remaining zeroes.

$$ 8x^4 + 32x^3 + 30x^2 - 8x^2 - 8 $$

$$ -8 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm4, \pm 8 $$

$$ 8 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm4, \pm 8 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 1} = \pm 4 \quad \frac{\pm 8}{\pm 1} = \pm 8 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 2} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 2} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 8}{\pm 2} = \pm 4 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{1}{4} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 4} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 8}{\pm 4} = \pm 2 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 8} = \pm \frac{1}{8} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 8} = \pm \frac{1}{4} \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 8} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 8}{\pm 8} = \pm 1 $$

$$ Q(x) = 8x^4 + 32x^3 + 30x^2 - 8x^2 - 8 $$

|    | $8$ | $32$ | $30$ | $-8$ | $-8$                        |
| -- | --- | ---- | ---- | ---- | --------------------------- |
| -2 | $8$ | $16$ | $-2$ | $-4$ | $0 = Q(-2) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

$$ g(x) = 8x^5 + 36x^4 + 46x^3 + 7x^2 - 12x - 4 = \left(x + \frac{1}{2}\right)(x + 2)(8x^3 + 16x^2 - 2x - 4) $$

$$ P(x) = 8x^3 + 16x^2 - 2x - 4 $$

|      | $8$ | $16$ | $-2$ | $-4$                        |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | --------------------------- |
| $-2$ | $8$ | $0$  | $-2$ | $0 = P(-2) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

$$ g(x) = 8x^5 + 36x^4 + 46x^3 + 7x^2 - 12x - 4 = \left(x + \frac{1}{2}\right)(x + 2)^2(8x^2 - 2) $$

$$ g(x) = 8x^5 + 36x^4 + 46x^3 + 7x^2 - 12x - 4 = 8\left(x + \frac{1}{2}\right)(x + 2)^2\left(x^2 - \frac{1}{4}\right) $$

$$ g(x) = 8\left(x + \frac{1}{2}\right)(x + 2)^2\left(x^2 - \frac{1}{4}\right) =  8\left(x + \frac{1}{2}\right)(x + 2)^2\left(x + \frac{1}{2}\right)\left(x - \frac{1}{2}\right)$$

$$ g(x) = 8\left(x + \frac{1}{2}\right)^2(x + 2)^2\left(x - \frac{1}{2}\right)$$

List all zeroes.

$$ x = -\frac{1}{2} \text{ (multiplicity } 2 \text{)} \quad x = -2 \text{ (multiplicity } 2 \text{)} \quad x = \frac{1}{2} $$

---

## Assignment Problems

Find all the zeroes of the following polynomials.

**1.**

$$ h(x) = x^3 - 2x^2 - 11x + 12 $$

List all possible factors of the first and last term:

$$ 12 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 4, \pm 6, \pm 12 $$

$$ 1 \text{ : } \pm 1 $$

Write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers where the
numerators must be factors of the last term and the denominators must be factors
of the first term.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 1} = \pm 4 \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 1} = \pm 6 \quad \frac{\pm 12}{\pm 1} = \pm 12 $$

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

$$ h(x) = x^3 - 2x^2 - 11x + 12 $$

|      | $1$ | $-2$ | $-11$ | $12$                       |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ----- | -------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $1$ | $-3$ | $-7$  | $19 = h(-1) \neq 0$        |
| $1$  | $1$ | $-1$ | $-12$ | $0 = h(1) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

Once a zero is found, rewrite the original polynomial with this zero as a
factor.

$$ h(x) = x^3 - 2x^2 - 11x + 12 = (x - 1)(x^2 - x - 12) $$

Repeat if necessary or use quadratic form to solve for the remaining zeroes.

$$ h(x) = x^3 - 2x^2 - 11x + 12 = (x - 1)(x + 3)(x - 4) $$

List all zeroes.

$$ x = 1 \quad x = -3 \quad x = 4 $$

**2.**

$$ f(x) = x^3 + 10x^2 + 29x + 20 $$

List all possible factors of the first and last term:

$$ 20 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 4, \pm 5, \pm 10, \pm 20 $$

$$ 1 \text{ : } \pm 1 $$

Write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers where the
numerators must be factors of the last term and the denominators must be factors
of the first term.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 1} = \pm 4 \quad \frac{\pm 5}{\pm 1} = \pm 5 \quad \frac{\pm 10}{\pm 1} = \pm 10 \quad \frac{\pm 20}{\pm 1} = \pm 20 $$

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

$$ f(x) = x^3 + 10x^2 + 29x + 20 $$

|      | $1$ | $10$ | $29$ | $20$                        |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | --------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $1$ | $9$  | $20$ | $0 = f(-1) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

Once a zero is found, rewrite the original polynomial with this zero as a
factor.

$$ f(x) = x^3 + 10x^2 + 29x + 20  = (x + 1)(x^2 + 9x + 20) $$

Repeat if necessary or use quadratic form to solve for the remaining zeroes.

$$ f(x) = x^3 + 10x^2 + 29x + 20  = (x + 1)(x + 4)(x + 5) $$

List all zeroes.

$$ x = -1 \quad x = -4 \quad x = -5 $$

**3.**

$$ h(x) = 2x^3 - 15x^2 + 34x - 24 $$

List all possible factors of the first and last term:

$$ -24 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 4, \pm 6, \pm 8, \pm 12, \pm 24 $$

$$ 2 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2 $$

Write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers where the
numerators must be factors of the last term and the denominators must be factors
of the first term.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 1} = \pm 4 \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 1} = \pm 6 \quad \frac{\pm 8}{\pm 1} = \pm 8 \quad \frac{\pm 12}{\pm 1} = \pm 12 \quad \frac{\pm 24}{\pm 1} = \pm 24 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 2} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{3}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 2} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 2} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 8}{\pm 2} = \pm 4 \quad \frac{\pm 12}{\pm 2} = \pm 6 \quad \frac{\pm 24}{\pm 2} = \pm 12 $$

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

$$ h(x) = 2x^3 - 15x^2 + 34x - 24 $$

|      | $2$ | $-15$ | $34$ | $-24$                      |
| ---- | --- | ----- | ---- | -------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $2$ | $-17$ | $51$ | $-75 = h(-1) \neq 0$       |
| $1$  | $2$ | $-13$ | $21$ | $-3 = h(1) \neq 0$         |
| $-2$ | $2$ | $-19$ | $72$ | $-168 = h(-2) \neq 0$      |
| $2$  | $2$ | $-11$ | $12$ | $0 = h(2) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

Once a zero is found, rewrite the original polynomial with this zero as a
factor.

$$ h(x) = 2x^3 - 15x^2 + 34x - 24 = (x - 2)(2x^2 - 11x + 12) $$

Repeat if necessary or use quadratic form to solve for the remaining zeroes.

$$ Q(x) = 2x^2 - 11x + 12 $$

$$ 12 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 4, \pm 6, \pm 12 $$

$$ 2 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 1} = \pm 4 \quad  \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 1} = \pm 6 \quad \frac{\pm 12}{\pm 1} = \pm 12 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 2} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{3}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 2} = \pm 2 \quad  \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 2} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 12}{\pm 2} = \pm 6 $$

|      | $2$ | $-11$ | $12$                       |
| ---- | --- | ----- | -------------------------- |
| $2$  | $2$ | $-7$  | $-2 = Q(2) \neq 0$         |
| $-3$ | $2$ | $-17$ | $63 = Q(-3) \neq 0$        |
| $3$  | $2$ | $-5$  | $-3 = Q(3) \neq 0$         |
| $-4$ | $2$ | $-19$ | $88 = Q(-4) \neq 0$        |
| $4$  | $2$ | $-3$  | $0 = Q(4) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

$$ h(x) = 2x^3 - 15x^2 + 34x - 24 = (x - 2)(x - 4)(2x - 3) $$

List all zeroes.

$$ x = 2 \quad x = 4 \quad x = \frac{3}{2} $$

**4.**

$$ g(x) = x^4 - 6x^3 + 22x + 15 $$

List all possible factors of the first and last term:

$$ 15 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 3, \pm 5, \pm 15 $$

$$ 1 \text{ : } \pm 1 $$

Write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers where the
numerators must be factors of the last term and the denominators must be factors
of the first term.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 5}{\pm 1} = \pm 5 \quad \frac{\pm 15}{\pm 1} = \pm 15 $$

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

$$ g(x) = x^4 - 6x^3 + 22x + 15 $$

|      | $1$ | $-6$ | $0$ | $22$ | $15$                        |
| ---- | --- | ---- | --- | ---- | --------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $1$ | $-7$ | $7$ | $15$ | $0 = g(-1) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

Once a zero is found, rewrite the original polynomial with this zero as a
factor.

$$ g(x) = x^4 - 6x^3 + 22x + 15 = (x + 1)(x^3 - 7x^2 + 7x + 15) $$

Repeat if necessary or use quadratic form to solve for the remaining zeroes.

$$ Q(x) = x^3 - 7x^2 + 7x + 15 $$

|      | $1$ | $-7$  | $7$  | $15$                       |
| ---- | --- | ----- | ---- | -------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $1$ | $-8$  | $15$ | $30 = Q(-1) \neq 0$        |
| $1$  | $1$ | $-6$  | $1$  | $16 = Q(1) \neq 0$         |
| $-3$ | $1$ | $-10$ | $37$ | $-96 = Q(-3) \neq 0$       |
| $3$  | $1$ | $-4$  | $-5$ | $0 = Q(3) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

$$ g(x) = x^4 - 6x^3 + 22x + 15 = (x + 1)(x^3 - 7x^2 + 7x + 15) = (x + 1)(x - 3)(x^2 - 4x - 5) $$

$$ g(x) = (x + 1)(x - 3)(x - 5)(x + 1) $$

$$ g(x) = (x + 1)^2(x - 3)(x - 5) $$

List all zeroes.

$$ x = -1 \text{ (multiplicity } 2\text{)} \quad x = 3 \quad x = -1 $$

**5.**

$$ f(x) = x^4 - 3x^3 - 7x^2 + 15x + 18 $$

List all possible factors of the first and last term:

$$ 18 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 6, \pm 9 \pm 18 $$

$$ 1 \text{ : } \pm 1 $$

Write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers where the
numerators must be factors of the last term and the denominators must be factors
of the first term.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 1} = \pm 6 \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 1} = \pm 9 \quad \frac{\pm 18}{\pm 1} = \pm 18 $$

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

$$ f(x) = x^4 - 3x^3 - 7x^2 + 15x + 18 $$

|      | $1$ | $-3$ | $-7$ | $15$ | $18$                        |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | ---- | --------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $1$ | $-4$ | $-3$ | $18$ | $36 = f(-1) \neq 0$         |
| $1$  | $1$ | $-2$ | $-9$ | $6$  | $24 = f(1) \neq 0$          |
| $-2$ | $1$ | $-5$ | $3$  | $9$  | $0 = f(-2) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

Once a zero is found, rewrite the original polynomial with this zero as a
factor.

$$ f(x) = x^4 - 3x^3 - 7x^2 + 15x + 18 = (x + 2)(x^3 - 5x^2 + 3x + 9) $$

Repeat if necessary or use quadratic form to solve for the remaining zeroes.

$$ Q(x) = x^3 - 5x^2 + 3x + 9 $$

$$ 9 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 3, \pm 9 $$

$$ 1 \text{ : } \pm 1 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 1} = \pm 9 $$

$$ Q(x) = x^3 - 5x^2 + 3x + 9 $$

|      | $1$ | $-5$ | $3$  | $9$                        |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | -------------------------- |
| $-3$ | $1$ | $-8$ | $27$ | $-72 = Q(-3) \neq 0$       |
| $3$  | $1$ | $-2$ | $-3$ | $0 = Q(3) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

$$ f(x) = x^4 - 3x^3 - 7x^2 + 15x + 18 = (x + 2)(x^3 - 5x^2 + 3x + 9) = (x + 2)(x - 3)(x^2 - 2x - 3) $$

$$ f(x) = (x + 2)(x - 3)(x^2 - 2x - 3) = (x + 2)(x - 3)(x - 3)(x + 1) = (x - 3)^2(x + 2)(x + 1) $$

List all zeroes.

$$ x = 3 \text{(multiplicity } 2\text{)} \quad x = -2 \quad x = -1 $$

**6.**

$$ Q(x) = 4x^4 + x^3 - 35x^2 - 24x + 36 $$

List all possible factors of the first and last term:

$$ 36 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 4, \pm 6, \pm 9, \pm 12, \pm 18, \pm 36 $$

$$ 4 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 4 $$

Write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers where the
numerators must be factors of the last term and the denominators must be factors
of the first term.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 1} = \pm 4 \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 1} = \pm 6 \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 1} = \pm 9 \quad \frac{\pm 12}{\pm 1} = \pm 12 \quad \frac{\pm 18}{\pm 1} = \pm 18 \quad \frac{\pm 36}{\pm 1} = \pm 36 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 2} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{3}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 2} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 2} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{9}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 12}{\pm 2} = \pm 6 \quad \frac{\pm 18}{\pm 2} = \pm 9 \quad \frac{\pm 36}{\pm 2} = \pm 18 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{1}{4} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 4} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{3}{4} \quad \frac{\pm 4}{\pm 4} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{3}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{9}{4} \quad \frac{\pm 12}{\pm 4} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 18}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{18}{4} \quad \frac{\pm 36}{\pm 4} = \pm 9 $$

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

$$ Q(x) = 4x^4 + x^3 - 35x^2 - 24x + 36 $$

|      | $4$ | $1$  | $-35$ | $-24$ | $36$                        |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ----- | ----- | --------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $4$ | $-3$ | $-32$ | $8$   | $28 = Q(-1) \neq 0$         |
| $1$  | $4$ | $5$  | $-30$ | $-54$ | $-18 = Q(1) \neq 0$         |
| $-2$ | $4$ | $-7$ | $-21$ | $18$  | $0 = Q(-2) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

Once a zero is found, rewrite the original polynomial with this zero as a
factor.

$$ Q(x) = 4x^4 + x^3 - 35x^2 - 24x + 36 = (x + 2)(4x^3 - 7x^2 - 21x + 18) $$

Repeat if necessary or use quadratic form to solve for the remaining zeroes.

$$ P(x) = 4x^3 - 7x^2 - 21x + 18 $$

$$ 18 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 6 \pm 9 \pm 18 $$

$$ 4 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 4 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 1} = \pm 6 \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 1} = \pm 9 \quad \frac{\pm 18}{\pm 1} = \pm 18 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 2} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{3}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 2} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{9}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 18}{\pm 2} = \pm 9 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{1}{4} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{3}{4} \quad \frac{\pm 6}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{3}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{9}{4} \quad \frac{\pm 18}{\pm 4} = \pm 6 $$

$$ P(x) = 4x^3 - 7x^2 - 21x + 18 $$

|      | $4$ | $-7$  | $-21$ | $18$                       |
| ---- | --- | ----- | ----- | -------------------------- |
| $-2$ | $4$ | $-15$ | $9$   | $0 = P(0) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

$$ Q(x) = 4x^4 + x^3 - 35x^2 - 24x + 36 = (x + 2)(4x^3 - 7x^2 - 21x + 18) = (x + 2)(x + 2)(4x^2 - 15x + 9) $$

$$ Q(x) = (x + 2)^2(4x^2 - 15x + 9) $$

$$ Q(x) = (x + 2)^2(4x - 3)(x - 3) $$

List all zeroes.

$$ x = -2 \text{ (multiplicity } 2\text{)} \quad x = \frac{3}{4} \quad x = 3 $$

**7.**

$$ h(x) = 9x^4 + 15x^3 - 11x^2 - 11x - 2 $$

List all possible factors of the first and last term:

$$ -2 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2 $$

$$ 9 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 3, \pm 9 $$

Write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers where the
numerators must be factors of the last term and the denominators must be factors
of the first term.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 1} = \pm 2 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 3} = \pm \frac{1}{3} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 3} = \pm \frac{2}{3} $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 9} = \pm \frac{1}{9} \quad \frac{\pm 2}{\pm 9} = \pm \frac{2}{9} $$

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

$$ h(x) = 9x^4 + 15x^3 - 11x^2 - 11x - 2 $$

|      | $9$ | $15$ | $-11$ | $-11$ | $-2$                       |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ----- | ----- | -------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $9$ | $6$  | $-17$ | $6$   | $-8 = h(-1) \neq 0$        |
| $1$  | $9$ | $24$ | $13$  | $2$   | $0 = h(1) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

Once a zero is found, rewrite the original polynomial with this zero as a
factor.

$$ h(x) = 9x^4 + 15x^3 - 11x^2 - 11x - 2 = (x - 1)(9x^3 + 24x^2 + 13x + 2) $$

Repeat if necessary or use quadratic form to solve for the remaining zeroes.

$$ Q(x) = 9x^3 + 24x^2 + 13x + 2 $$

|      | $9$ | $24$ | $13$ | $2$                         |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | --------------------------- |
| $1$  | $9$ | $33$ | $46$ | $48 = Q(1) \neq 0$          |
| $-2$ | $9$ | $6$  | $1$  | $0 = Q(-2) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

$$ h(x) = 9x^4 + 15x^3 - 11x^2 - 11x - 2 = (x - 1)(9x^3 + 24x^2 + 13x + 2) = (x - 1)(x + 2)(9x^2 + 6x + 1) $$

$$ h(x) = (x - 1)(x + 2)(9x^2 + 6x + 1) $$

$$ h(x) = (x - 1)(x + 2)(3x + 1)(3x + 1) $$

$$ h(x) = (x - 1)(x + 2)(3x + 1)^2 $$

List all zeroes.

$$ x = 1 \quad x = -2 \quad x = -\frac{1}{3} \text{ (multiplicity } 2\text{)} $$

**8.**

$$ A(x) = 2x^5 + 19x^4 + 68x^3 + 114x^2 + 90x + 27 $$

List all possible factors of the first and last term:

$$ 27 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 3, \pm 9, \pm 27 $$

$$ 2 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2 $$

Write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers where the
numerators must be factors of the last term and the denominators must be factors
of the first term.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 1} = \pm 9 \quad \frac{\pm 27}{\pm 1} = \pm 27 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{3}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{9}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 27}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{27}{2} $$

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

$$ A(x) = 2x^5 + 19x^4 + 68x^3 + 114x^2 + 90x + 27 $$

|      | $2$ | $19$ | $68$ | $114$ | $90$ | $27$                      |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | ----- | ---- | ------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $2$ | $17$ | $51$ | $63$  | $27$ | $0 A(-1) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

Once a zero is found, rewrite the original polynomial with this zero as a
factor.

$$ A(x) = 2x^5 + 19x^4 + 68x^3 + 114x^2 + 90x + 27 = (x + 1)(2x^4 + 17x^3 + 51x^2 + 63x + 27) $$

$$ Q(x) = 2x^4 + 17x^3 + 51x^2 + 63x + 27 $$

|      | $2$ | $17$ | $51$ | $63$ | $27$                        |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | ---- | --------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $2$ | $15$ | $36$ | $27$ | $0 = Q(-1) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

$$ A(x) = 2x^5 + 19x^4 + 68x^3 + 114x^2 + 90x + 27 = (x + 1)(2x^4 + 17x^3 + 51x^2 + 63x + 27) = (x + 1)^2(2x^3 + 15x^2 + 36x + 27) $$

$$ P(x) = 2x^3 + 15x^2 + 36x + 27 $$

|      | $2$ | $15$ | $36$ | $27$                       |
| ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | -------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $2$ | $13$ | $23$ | $4 = P(-1) \neq 0$         |
| $1$  | $2$ | $17$ | $53$ | $80 = P(1) \neq 0$         |
| $-3$ | $2$ | $9$  | $9$  | $0 = P(3) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

$$ A(x) = 2x^5 + 19x^4 + 68x^3 + 114x^2 + 90x + 27 = (x + 1)(2x^4 + 17x^3 + 51x^2 + 63x + 27) = (x + 1)^2(2x^3 + 15x^2 + 36x + 27) = (x + 1)^2(x + 3)(2x^2 + 9x + 9) $$

$$ A(x) = (x + 1)^2(x + 3)(2x^2 + 9x + 9) $$

$$ A(x) = (x + 1)^2(x + 3)(2x + 3)(x + 3) $$

$$ A(x) = (x + 1)^2(x + 3)^2(2x + 3) $$

List all zeroes.

$$ x = -1 \text{ (multiplicity } 2\text{)} \quad x = -3 \text{ (multiplicity } 2\text{)} \quad x = -\frac{3}{2} $$

**9.**

$$ P(x) = 16x^5 - 48x^4 + 24x^3 + 40x^2 - 39x + 9 $$

List all possible factors of the first and last term:

$$ 9 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 3, \pm 9 $$

$$ 16 \text{ : } \pm 1, \pm 2, \pm 4, \pm 8, \pm 16 $$

Write down all possible fractions that we can form from these numbers where the
numerators must be factors of the last term and the denominators must be factors
of the first term.

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 1} = \pm 1 \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 1} = \pm 3 \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 1} = \pm 9 $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{1}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{3}{2} \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 2} = \pm \frac{9}{2} $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{1}{4} \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{3}{4} \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 4} = \pm \frac{9}{4} $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 8} = \pm \frac{1}{8} \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 8} = \pm \frac{3}{8} \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 8} = \pm \frac{9}{8} $$

$$ \frac{\pm 1}{\pm 16} = \pm \frac{1}{16} \quad \frac{\pm 3}{\pm 16} = \pm \frac{3}{16} \quad \frac{\pm 9}{\pm 16} = \pm \frac{9}{16} $$

Use synthetic division to find the zeroes. Start with the "small" integers
first.

$$ P(x) = 16x^5 - 48x^4 + 24x^3 + 40x^2 - 39x + 9 $$

|      | $16$ | $-48$ | $24$ | $40$  | $-39$ | $9$                        |
| ---- | ---- | ----- | ---- | ----- | ----- | -------------------------- |
| $-1$ | $16$ | $-64$ | $88$ | $-48$ | $9$   | $0 = P(0) = 0 \text{ ! !}$ |

Once a zero is found, rewrite the original polynomial with this zero as a
factor.

$$ P(x) = 16x^5 - 48x^4 + 24x^3 + 40x^2 - 39x + 9 = (x + 1)(16x^4 - 64x^3 + 88x^2 - 48x + 9) $$

$$ Q(x) = 16x^4 - 64x^3 + 88x^2 - 48x + 9 $$

$$ Q(x) = (16x^2 - 48x + 9)(x^2 - 4) $$

$$ Q(x) = (16x^2 - 48x + 9)(x + 2)(x - 2) $$

$$ x = \frac{-(-48) \pm \sqrt{(-48)^2 - 4(16)(9)}}{2(16)} $$

$$ x = \frac{48 \pm 24\sqrt{3}}{32} $$

$$ x = \frac{3}{2} \pm \frac{3}{4}\sqrt{3} $$

$$ x = \frac{6}{4} \pm \frac{3}{4}\sqrt{3} $$

$$ x = \frac{6 \pm 3\sqrt{3}}{4} $$

$$ P(x) = (x + 1)(x + 2)(x - 2)\left(x - \frac{6 \pm 3\sqrt{3}}{4}\right) $$

List all zeroes.

$$ x = 1 \quad x = -2 \quad x = -2 \quad x = \frac{6 + 3\sqrt{3}}{4} \quad x = \frac{6 - 3\sqrt{3}}{4} $$
