# 5.5 Partial Fractions

This section doesn’t really have a lot to do with the rest of this chapter, but
since the subject needs to be covered and this was a fairly short chapter it
seemed like as good a place as any to put it.

So, let’s start with the following. Let’s suppose that we want to add the
following two rational expressions.

$$ \frac{8}{x + 2} - \frac{5}{x - 4} = \frac{8(x - 4)}{(x + 1)(x - 4)} - \frac{5(x + 1)}{(x + 1)(x - 4)} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{8x - 32 - (5x + 5)}{(x + 1)(x - 4)} $$

$$ = \frac{3x - 37}{(x + 1)(x - 4)} $$

What we want to do in this section is to start with rational expressions and ask
what simpler rational expressions did we add and/or subtract to get the original
expression. The process of doing this is called **partial fractions** and the
result is often called the **partial fraction decomposition**.

The process can be a little long and on occasion messy, but it is actually
fairly simple. We will start by trying to determine the partial fraction
decomposition of,

$$ \frac{P(x)}{Q(x)} $$

where both $P(x)$ and $Q(x)$ are polynomials and the degree of $P(x)$ is smaller
than the degree of $Q(x)$. Partial fractions can only be done if the degree of
the numerator is strictly less than the degree of the denominator. That is
important to remember.

So, once we’ve determined that partial fractions can be done we factor the
denominator as completely as possible. Then for each factor in the denominator
we can use the following table to determine the term(s) we pick up in the
partial fraction decomposition.

| **Factor in denominator** | **Term in partial fractal decomposition**                                                                                   |
| ------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| $ax + b$                  | $\dfrac{A}{ax + b}$                                                                                                         |
| $(ax + b)^k$              | $\dfrac{A_1}{ax + b} + \dfrac{A_2}{(ax + b)^2} + \dots + \dfrac{A_k}{(ax + b)^k}$                                           |
| $ax^2 + bx + c$           | $\dfrac{Ax + B}{ax^2 + bx + c}$                                                                                             |
| $(ax^2 + bx + c)^k$       | $\dfrac{A_1x + B_1}{ax^2 + bx + c} + \dfrac{A_2x + B_2}{(ax^2 + bx + c)^2} + \dots + \dfrac{A_kx + B_k}{(ax^2 + bx + c)^k}$ |

Notice that the first and third cases are really special cases of the second and
fourth cases respectively if we let $k = 1$. Also, it will always be possible to
factor any polynomial down into a product of linear factors $(ax + b)$ and
quadratic factors $(ax^2 + bx + c)$ some of which may be raised to a power.

There are several methods for determining the coefficients for each term and we
will go over each of those as we work the examples. Speaking of which, let’s get
started on some examples.

---

**Example 1**

Determine the partial fraction decomposition of each of the following.

We’ll go through the first one in great detail to show the complete partial
fraction process and then we’ll leave most of the explanation out of the
remaining parts.

**(a)**

$$ \frac{8x - 42}{x^2 + 3x - 18} $$

The first thing to do is factor the denominator as much as we can.

$$ \frac{8x - 42}{x^2 + 3x - 18} = \frac{8x - 42}{(x + 6)(x - 3)} $$

So, by comparing to the table above it looks like the partial fraction
decomposition must look like,

$$ \frac{8x - 42}{x^2 + 3x - 18} = \frac{A}{x + 6} + \frac{B}{x - 3} $$

Note that we’ve got different coefficients for each term since there is no
reason to think that they will be the same.

Now, we need to determine the values of $A$ and $B$. The first step is to
actually add the two terms back up. This is usually simpler than it might appear
to be. Recall that we first need the least common denominator, but we’ve already
got that from the original rational expression. In this case it is,

$$ LCD = (x + 6)(x - 3) $$

Now, just look at each term and compare the denominator to the LCD. Multiply the
numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add. In this case this
gives,

$$ \frac{8x - 42}{x^2 + 3x - 18} = \frac{A(x - 3)}{(x + 6)(x - 3)} = \frac{B(x + 6)}{(x + 6)(x - 3)} = \frac{A(x - 3) + B(x + 6)}{(x + 6)(x - 3)}$$

We need values of $A$ and $B$ so that the numerator of the expression on the
left is the same as the numerator of the term on the right. Or,

$$ 8x - 42 = A(x - 3) + B(x + 6) $$

This needs to be true regardless of the $x$ that we plug into this equation. As
noted above there are several ways to do this. One way will always work but can
be messy and will often require knowledge that we don’t have yet. The other way
will not always work, but when it does it will greatly reduce the amount of work
required.

In this set of examples, the second (and easier) method will always work so
we’ll be using that here. Here we are going to make use of the fact that this
equation must be true regardless of the $x$ that we plug in.

So, let’s pick an $x$, plug it in and see what happens. For no apparent reason
let’s try plugging in $x = 3$. Doing this gives,

$$ 8(3) - 42 = A(3 - 3) + B(3 + 6) $$

$$ -18 = 9B $$

$$ -2 = B $$

Can you see why we choose this number? By choosing $x = 3$ we got the term
involving $A$ to drop out and we were left with a simple equation that we can
solve for $B$.

Now, we could also choose $x = −6$ for exactly the same reason. Here is what
happens if we use this value of $x$.

$$ 8(-6) - 42 = A(-6 - 3) + B(-6 + 6) $$

$$ -90 = -9A $$

$$ 10 = A $$

So, by correctly picking x we were able to quickly and easily get the values of
$A$ and $B$. So, all that we need to do at this point is plug them in to finish
the problem. Here is the partial fraction decomposition for this part.

$$ \frac{8x - 42}{x^2 + 3x - 18} = \frac{10}{x + 6} + \frac{-2}{x - 3} = \frac{10}{x + 6} - \frac{2}{x - 3} $$

Notice that we moved the minus sign on the second term down to make the addition
a subtraction. We will always do that.

**(b)**

$$ \frac{9 - 9x}{2x^2 + 7x - 4} $$

Okay, in this case we won’t put quite as much detail into the problem. We’ll
first factor the denominator and then get the form of the partial fraction
decomposition.

$$ \frac{9 - 9x}{2x^2 + 7x - 4} = \frac{9 - 9x}{(2x - 1)(x + 4)} = \frac{A}{2x - 1} + \frac{B}{x + 4} $$

In this case the LCD is $(2x - 1)(x + 4)$ and so adding the two terms back up
give,

$$ \frac{9 - 9x}{2x^2 + 7x - 4} = \frac{A(x + 4) + B(2x - 1)}{(2x - 1)(x + 4)} $$

Next, we need to set the two numerators equal.

$$ 9 - 9x = A(x + 4) + B(2x - 1) $$

Now all that we need to do is correctly pick values of $x$ that will make one of
the terms zero and solve for the constants. Note that in this case we will need
to make one of them a fraction. This is fairly common so don’t get excited about
it. Here is this work.

$$ x = -4 \text{ : } 45 = -9B \Rightarrow B = -5 $$

$$ x = \frac{1}{2} \text{ : } \frac{9}{2} = A\left(\frac{9}{2}\right) \Rightarrow A = 1 $$

The partial fraction decomposition for this expression is,

$$ \frac{9 - 9x}{2x^2 + 7x - 4} = \frac{1}{2x - 1} - \frac{5}{x + 4} $$

**(c\)**

$$ \frac{4x^2}{(x - 1)(x - 2)^2} $$

In this case the denominator has already been factored for us. Notice as well
that we’ve now got a linear factor to a power. So, recall from our table that
this means we will get 2 terms in the partial fraction decomposition from this
factor. Here is the form of the partial fraction decomposition for this
expression.

$$ \frac{4x^2}{(x - 1)(x - 2)^2}  = \frac{A}{x - 1} + \frac{B}{x - 2} + \frac{C}{(x - 2)^2} $$

Remember that we just need to add in the factors that are missing to each term.

Now set the numerators equal.

$$ 4x^2 = A(x - 2)^2 + B(x - 1)(x - 2) + C(x - 1) $$

In this case we’ve got a slightly different situation from the previous two
parts. Let’s start by picking a couple of values of $x$ and seeing what we get
since there are two that should jump right out at us as being particularly
useful.

$$ x = 1 \text{ : } 4 = A(-1)^2 \Rightarrow A = 4 $$

$$ x = 2 \text{ : } 16 = C(1) \Rightarrow C = 16 $$

So, we can get $A$ and $C$ in the same manner that we’ve been using to this
point. However, there is no value of $x$ that will allow us to eliminate the
first and third term leaving only the middle term that we can use to solve for
$B$. While this may appear to be a problem it actually isn’t. At this point we
know two of the three constants. So all we need to do is chose any other value
of $x$ that would be easy to work with ($x = 0$ seems particularly useful here),
plug that in along with the values of $A$ and $C$ and we’ll get a simple
equation that we can solve for $B$.

Here is that work.

$$ 4(0)^2 = (4)(-2)^2 + B(-1)(-2) + 16(-1) $$

$$ 0 = 16 + 2B - 16 $$

$$ 0 = 2B $$

$$ 0 = B $$

In this case we got $B = 0$ this will happen on occasion, but do not expect it
to happen in all cases. Here is the partial fraction decomposition for this
part.

$$ \frac{4x^2}{(x - 1)(x - 2)^2} = \frac{4}{x - 1} + \frac{16}{(x - 2)^2} $$

**(d)**

$$ \frac{9x + 25}{(x + 3)^2} $$

Again, the denominator has already been factored for us. In this case the form
of the partial fraction decomposition is,

$$ \frac{9x + 25}{(x + 3)^2} = \frac{A}{x + 3} + \frac{B}{(x + 3)^2} $$

Adding the two terms together gives,

$$ \frac{9x + 25}{(x + 3)^2} = \frac{A(x + 3)+ B}{(x + 3)^2} $$

Notice that in this case the second term already had the LCD under it and so we
didn’t need to add anything in that time.

Setting the numerators equal gives,

$$ 9x + 25 = A(x + 3) + B $$

Now, again, we can get $B$ for free by picking $x = -3$.

$$ 9(-3) + 25 = A(-3 + 3) + B $$

$$ -2 = B $$

To find $A$ we will do the same thing that we did in the previous part. We'll
use $x = 0$ and the fact that we know what $B$ is.

$$ 25 = A(3) - 2 $$

$$ 27 = 3A $$

$$ 9 = A $$

In this case, notice that the constant in the numerator of the first isn’t zero
as it was in the previous part. Here is the partial fraction decomposition for
this part.

$$ \frac{9x + 25}{(x + 3)^2} = \frac{9}{x + 3} - \frac{2}{(x + 3)^2} $$

---

Now, we need to do a set of examples with quadratic factors. Note however, that
this is where the work often gets fairly messy and in fact we haven’t covered
the material yet that will allow us to work many of these problems. We can work
some simple examples however, so let’s do that.

---

**Example 2**

Determine the partial fraction decomposition of each of the following.

**(a)**

$$ \frac{8x^2 - 12}{x(x^2 + 2x - 6)} $$

In this case the $x$ that sits in the front is a linear term since we can write
it as,

$$ x = x + 0 $$

and so the form of the partial fraction decomposition is,

$$ \frac{8x^2 - 12}{x(x^2 + 2x - 6)} = \frac{A}{x} + \frac{Bx + C}{x^2 + 2x - 6} $$

Now we'll use the fact that the LCD is $x(x^2 + 2x - 6)$ and add the two terms
together,

$$ \frac{8x^2 - 12}{x(x^2 + 2x - 6)} = \frac{A(x^2 + 2x - 6) + x(Bx + C)}{x(x^2 + 2x - 6)} $$

Next, set the numerators equal.

$$ 8x^2 - 12 = A(x^2 + 2x - 6) + x(Bx + C) $$

This is where the process changes from the previous set of examples. We could
choose $x = 0$ to get the value of $A$, but that’s the only constant that we
could get using this method and so it just won’t work all that well here.

What we need to do here is multiply the right side out and then collect all the
like terms as follows,

$$  8x^2 - 12 = Ax^2 + 2Ax - 6A + Bx^2 + Cx $$

$$ 8X^2 - 12 = (A + B)x^2 + (2A + C)x - 6A $$

Now, we need to choose $A$, $B$, and $C$ so that these two are equal. That means
that the coefficient of the $x^2$ term on the right side will have to be $8$
since that is the coefficient of the $x^2$ term on the left side. Likewise, the
coefficient of the $x$ term on the right side must be zero since there isn’t an
$x$ term on the left side. Finally the constant term on the right side must be
$-12$ since that is the constant on the left side.

We generally call this **setting coefficients equal** and we’ll write down the
following equations.

$$ A + B = 8 $$

$$ 2A + C = 0 $$

$$ -6A = -12 $$

Now, we haven’t talked about how to solve systems of equations yet, but this is
one that we can do without that knowledge. We can solve the third equation
directly for $A$ to get that $A = 2$. We can then plug this into the first two
equations to get,

$$ 2 + B = 8 \quad \Rightarrow B = 6 $$

$$ 2(2) + C = 0 \quad \Rightarrow C = -4 $$

So, the partial fraction decomposition for this expression is,

$$ \frac{8x^2 - 12}{x(x^2 + 2x - 6)} = \frac{2}{x} + \frac{6x - 4}{x^2 + 2x - 6} $$

**(b)**

$$ \frac{3x^3 + 7x - 4}{(x^2 + 2)^2} $$

Here is the form of the partial fraction decomposition for this part.

$$ \frac{3x^3 + 7x - 4}{(x^2 + 2)^2} = \frac{Ax + B}{x^2 + 2} + \frac{Cx + D}{(x^2 + 2)^2} $$

Adding the two terms up gives,

$$ \frac{3x^3 + 7x - 4}{(x^2 + 2)^2} = \frac{(Ax + B)(x^2 + 2) + Cx + D}{(x^2 + 2)^2} $$

Now, set the numerators equal and we might as well go ahead and multiply the
right side out and collect up like terms while we’re at it.

$$ 3x^3 + 7x - 4 = (Ax + B)(x^2 + 2) + Cx + D $$

$$ 3x^3 + 7x - 4 = Ax^3 + 2Ax + Bx^2 + 2B + Cx + D $$

$$ 3x^3 + 7x - 4 = Ax^3 + Bx^2 + (2A + C)x + 2B + D $$

Setting the coefficients equal gives,

$$ A = 3 $$

$$ B = 0 $$

$$ 2A + C = 7 $$

$$ 2B + D = -4 $$

In this case we got $A$ and $B$ for free and don’t get excited about the fact
that $B = 0$. This is not a problem and in fact when this happens the remaining
work is often a little easier. So, plugging the known values of $A$ and $B$ into
the remaining two equations gives,

$$ 2(3) + C = 7 \quad \Rightarrow C = 1 $$

$$ 2(0) + D = -4 \quad \Rightarrow D = -4 $$

The partial fraction decomposition is then,

$$ \frac{3x^3 + 7x - 4}{(x^2 + 2)^2} = \frac{3x}{x^2 + 2} + \frac{x - 4}{(x^2 + 2)^2} $$

---

## Practice Problems

Determine the partial fraction decomposition of each of the following
expressions.

**1.**

$$ \frac{17x - 53}{x^2 - 2x - 15} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{17x - 53}{x^2 - 2x - 15} = \frac{17x - 53}{(x - 5)(x + 3)} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{17x - 53}{x^2 - 2x - 15} = \frac{A}{x - 5} + \frac{B}{x + 3} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x - 5)(x + 3) $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{17x - 53}{x^2 - 2x - 15} = \frac{A(x + 3)}{(x - 5)(x + 3)} + \frac{B(x - 5)}{(x - 5)(x + 3)} $$

$$ \quad = \frac{A(x + 3) + B(x - 5)}{(x - 5)(x + 3)} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 17x - 53 = A(x + 3) + B(x - 5) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = -3 $$

$$ 17(-3) - 53 = A((-3) + 3) + B((-3) - 5) $$

$$ -104 = A(0) + B(-8) $$

$$ -104 = -8B $$

$$ 13 = B $$

$$ x = 5 $$

$$ 17(5) - 53 = A((5) + 3) + B((5) - 5) $$

$$ 32 = A(8) + B(0) $$

$$ 32 = 8A $$

$$ 4 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{17x - 53}{x^2 - 2x - 15} = \frac{A}{x - 5} + \frac{B}{x + 3} $$

$$ \frac{17x - 53}{x^2 - 2x - 15} = \frac{4}{x - 5} + \frac{13}{x + 3} $$

**2.**

$$ \frac{34 - 12x}{3x^2 - 10x - 8} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{34 - 12x}{(3x + 2)(x - 4)} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{34 - 12x}{3x^2 - 10x - 8} = \frac{A}{3x + 2} + \frac{B}{x - 4} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (3x + 2)(x - 4) $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{34 - 12x}{3x^2 - 10x - 8} = \frac{A(x - 4) + B(3x + 2)}{(3x + 2)(x - 4)} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 34 - 12x = A(x - 4)+ B(3x + 2) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = 4 $$

$$ 34 - 12(4) = A((4) - 4)+ B(3(4) + 2) $$

$$ 34 - 48 = A(0) + B(12 + 2) $$

$$ -14 = 14B $$

$$ -1 = B $$

$$ x = -\frac{2}{3} $$

$$ 34 - 12\left(-\frac{2}{3}\right) = A\left(\left(-\frac{2}{3}\right) - 4\right)+ B\left(3\left(-\frac{2}{3}\right) + 2\right) $$

$$ 34 + 8 = A\left(-\frac{14}{3}\right) + B(-2 + 2) $$

$$ 42 = A\left(-\frac{14}{3}\right) $$

$$ -9 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{34 - 12x}{3x^2 - 10x - 8} = \frac{A}{3x + 2} + \frac{B}{x - 4} $$

$$ \frac{34 - 12x}{3x^2 - 10x - 8} = \frac{-9}{3x + 2} + \frac{-1}{x - 4} $$

$$ \frac{34 - 12x}{3x^2 - 10x - 8} = \frac{-9}{3x + 2} - \frac{1}{x - 4} $$

**3.**

$$ \frac{125 + 4x - 9x^2}{(x - 1)(x + 3)(x + 4)} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{125 + 4x - 9x^2}{(x - 1)(x + 3)(x + 4)} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{125 + 4x - 9x^2}{(x - 1)(x + 3)(x + 4)} = \frac{A}{x - 1} + \frac{B}{x + 3} + \frac{C}{x + 4} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x - 1)(x + 3)(x + 4) $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{125 + 4x - 9x^2}{(x - 1)(x + 3)(x + 4)} = \frac{A}{x - 1} + \frac{B}{x + 3} + \frac{C}{x + 4} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x + 3)(x + 4)}{x - 1} + \frac{B(x - 1)(x + 4)}{x + 3} + \frac{C(x - 1)(x + 3)}{x + 4} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x + 3)(x + 4) + B(x - 1)(x + 4) + C(x - 1)(x + 3)}{(x - 1)(x + 3)(x + 4)} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 125 + 4x - 9x^2 = A(x + 3)(x + 4) + B(x - 1)(x + 4) + C(x - 1)(x + 3) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = -3 $$

$$ 125 + 4(-3) - 9(-3)^2 = A((-3) + 3)((-3) + 4) + B((-3) - 1)((-3) + 4) + C((-3) - 1)((-3) + 3) $$

$$ 125 - 12 - 9(9) = A(0)(1) + B(-4)(1) + C(-4)(0) $$

$$ 125 - 12 - 81 = -4B $$

$$ 32 = -4B $$

$$ -8 = B $$

$$ x = -4 $$

$$ 125 + 4(-4) - 9(-4)^2 = A((-4) + 3)((-4) + 4) + B((-4) - 1)((-4) + 4) + C((-4) - 1)((-4) + 3) $$

$$ 125 - 16 - 9(16) = A(-1)(0) + B(-5)(0) + C(-5)(-1) $$

$$ 125 - 16 - 144 = 5C $$

$$ -35 = 5C $$

$$ -7 = C $$

$$ x = 1 $$

$$ 125 + 4(1) - 9(1)^2 = A((1) + 3)((1) + 4) + B((1) - 1)((1) + 4) + C((1) - 1)((1) + 3) $$

$$ 125 + 4 - 9 = A(4)(5) + B(0)(5) + C(0)(4) $$

$$ 120 = 20A $$

$$ 6 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{125 + 4x - 9x^2}{(x - 1)(x + 3)(x + 4)} = \frac{A}{x - 1} + \frac{B}{x + 3} + \frac{C}{x + 4} $$

$$ \frac{125 + 4x - 9x^2}{(x - 1)(x + 3)(x + 4)} = \frac{6}{x - 1} + \frac{-8}{x + 3} + \frac{-7}{x + 4} $$

$$ \frac{125 + 4x - 9x^2}{(x - 1)(x + 3)(x + 4)} = \frac{6}{x - 1} - \frac{8}{x + 3} - \frac{7}{x + 4} $$

**4.**

$$ \frac{10x + 35}{(x + 4)^2} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{10x + 35}{(x + 4)^2} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{10x + 35}{(x + 4)^2} = \frac{A}{x + 4} + \frac{B}{(x + 4)^2} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x + 4)^2 $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{10x + 35}{(x + 4)^2} = \frac{A(x + 4)}{(x + 4)^2} + \frac{B}{(x + 4)^2} $$

$$ \frac{10x + 35}{(x + 4)^2} = \frac{A(x + 4) + B}{(x + 4)^2} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 10x + 35 = A(x + 4) + B $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = -4 $$

$$ 10(-4) + 35 = A((-4) + 4) + B $$

$$ -40 + 35 = A(0) + B $$

$$ -5 = B $$

To find $A$, set $x = 0$ or $x = 1$ and also plug in the found $B$:

$$ x = 0 $$

$$ 10(0) + 35 = A((0) + 4) + (-5) $$

$$ 35 = A(4) - 5 $$

$$ 40 = 4A $$

$$ 10 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{10x + 35}{(x + 4)^2} = \frac{A}{x + 4} + \frac{B}{(x + 4)^2} $$

$$ \frac{10x + 35}{(x + 4)^2} = \frac{10}{x + 4} + \frac{-5}{(x + 4)^2} $$

$$ \frac{10x + 35}{(x + 4)^2} = \frac{10}{x + 4} - \frac{5}{(x + 4)^2} $$

**5.**

$$ \frac{6x + 5}{(2x - 1)^2} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{6x + 5}{(2x - 1)^2} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{6x + 5}{(2x - 1)^2} = \frac{A}{2x - 1} + \frac{B}{(2x - 1)^2} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (2x - 1)^2 $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{6x + 5}{(2x - 1)^2} = \frac{A(2x - 1)}{2x - 1} + \frac{B}{(2x - 1)^2} $$

$$ = \frac{A(2x - 1) + B}{(2x - 1)^2} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 6x + 5 = A(2x - 1) + B $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = \frac{1}{2} $$

$$ 6\left(\frac{1}{2}\right) + 5 = A\left(2\left(\frac{1}{2}\right) - 1\right) + B $$

$$ 3 + 5 = A(1 - 1) + B $$

$$ 8 = B $$

To find $A$, set $x = 0$ or $x = 1$ and set found $B$:

$$ 6(0) + 5 = A(2(0) - 1) + 8 $$

$$ 5 = A(-1) + 8 $$

$$ -3 = -A $$

$$ 3 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{6x + 5}{(2x - 1)^2} = \frac{A}{2x - 1} + \frac{B}{(2x - 1)^2} $$

$$ \frac{6x + 5}{(2x - 1)^2} = \frac{3}{2x - 1} + \frac{8}{(2x - 1)^2} $$

**6.**

$$ \frac{7x^2 - 17x + 38}{(x + 6)(x - 1)^2} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{7x^2 - 17x + 38}{(x + 6)(x - 1)^2} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{7x^2 - 17x + 38}{(x + 6)(x - 1)^2} = \frac{A}{x + 6} + \frac{B}{x - 1} + \frac{C}{(x - 1)^2} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x + 6)(x - 1)^2 $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{7x^2 - 17x + 38}{(x + 6)(x - 1)^2} = \frac{A(x - 1)^2}{x + 6} + \frac{B(x + 6)(x - 1)}{x - 1} + \frac{C(x + 6)}{(x - 1)^2} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x - 1)^2 + B(x + 6)(x - 1) + C(x + 6)}{(x + 6)(x - 1)^2} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 7x^2 - 17x + 38 = A(x - 1)^2 + B(x + 6)(x - 1) + C(x + 6) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = 1 $$

$$ 7(1)^2 - 17(1) + 38 = A((1) - 1)^2 + B((1) + 6)((1) - 1) + C((1) + 6) $$

$$ 7 - 17 + 38 = A(0) + B(7)(0) + C(7) $$

$$ 28 = 7C $$

$$ 4 = C $$

$$ x = -6 $$

$$ 7(-6)^2 - 17(-6) + 38 = A((-6) - 1)^2 + B((-6) + 6)((-6) - 1) + C((-6) + 6) $$

$$ 7(36) + 102 + 38 = A(-7)^2 + B(0)(-7) + C(0) $$

$$ 392 = 49A $$

$$ 8 = A $$

To find $B$, plug in $x = 0$ and also the found values for both $A$ and $C$:

$$ 7(0)^2 - 17(0) + 38 = 8((0) - 1)^2 + B((0) + 6)((0) - 1) + 4((0) + 6) $$

$$ 38 = 8(-1)^2 + B(6)(-1) + 4(6) $$

$$ 38 = 8 + B(-6) + 24 $$

$$ 38 = 32 - 6B $$

$$ 6 = -6B $$

$$ -1 = B $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{7x^2 - 17x + 38}{(x + 6)(x - 1)^2} = \frac{A}{x + 6} + \frac{B}{x - 1} + \frac{C}{(x - 1)^2} $$

$$ \frac{7x^2 - 17x + 38}{(x + 6)(x - 1)^2} = \frac{8}{x + 6} + \frac{-1}{x - 1} + \frac{4}{(x - 1)^2} $$

$$ \frac{7x^2 - 17x + 38}{(x + 6)(x - 1)^2} = \frac{8}{x + 6} - \frac{1}{x - 1} + \frac{4}{(x - 1)^2} $$

**7.**

$$ \frac{4x^2 - 22x + 7}{(2x + 3)(x - 2)^2} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{4x^2 - 22x + 7}{(2x + 3)(x - 2)^2} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{4x^2 - 22x + 7}{(2x + 3)(x - 2)^2} = \frac{A}{2x + 3} + \frac{B}{x - 2} + \frac{C}{(x - 2)^2} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (2x + 3)(x - 2)^2 $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{4x^2 - 22x + 7}{(2x + 3)(x - 2)^2} = \frac{A}{2x + 3} + \frac{B}{x - 2} + \frac{C}{(x - 2)^2} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x - 2)^2 + B(2x + 3)(x - 2) + C(2x + 3)}{(2x + 3)(x - 2)^2} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 4x^2 - 22x + 7 = A(x - 2)^2 + B(2x + 3)(x - 2) + C(2x + 3) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = 2 $$

$$ 4(2)^2 - 22(2) + 7 = A((2) - 2)^2 + B(2(2) + 3)((2) - 2) + C(2(2) + 3) $$

$$ 4(4) - 44 + 7 = A(0)^2 + B(4 + 3)(0) + C(4 + 3) $$

$$ 16 - 44 + 7 = 7C $$

$$ -21 = 7C $$

$$ -3 = C $$

$$ x = -\frac{3}{2} $$

$$ 4\left(-\frac{3}{2}\right)^2 - 22\left(-\frac{3}{2}\right) + 7 = A\left(\left(-\frac{3}{2}\right) - 2\right)^2 + B\left(2\left(-\frac{3}{2}\right) + 3\right)\left(\left(-\frac{3}{2}\right) - 2\right) + C\left(2\left(-\frac{3}{2}\right) + 3\right) $$

$$ 4\left(\frac{9}{4}\right) + 33 + 7 = A\left(-\frac{7}{2}\right)^2 + B(0)\left(-\frac{7}{2}\right) + C(0) $$

$$ 9 + 33 + 7 = \frac{49}{4}A $$

$$ 49 = \frac{49}{4}A $$

$$ 4 = A $$

To find $B$, plug in $x = 0$ as well as the values for $A$ and $C$:

$$ 4(0)^2 - 22(0) + 7 = 4((0) - 2)^2 + B(2(0) + 3)((0) - 2) + (-3)(2(0) + 3) $$

$$ 7 = 4(-2)^2 + B(3)(-2) - 3(3) $$

$$ 7 = 16 - 6B - 9 $$

$$ 7 = 7 - 6B $$

$$ 0 = -6B $$

$$ 0 = B $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

**8.**

$$ \frac{3x^2 + 7x + 28}{x(x^2 + x + 7)} $$

Factor the denominator:

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

Determine the LCD:

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

Set the numerators equal to each other:

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{4x^2 - 22x + 7}{(2x + 3)(x - 2)^2} = \frac{A}{2x + 3} + \frac{B}{x - 2} + \frac{C}{(x - 2)^2} $$

$$ \frac{4x^2 - 22x + 7}{(2x + 3)(x - 2)^2} = \frac{4}{2x + 3} + \frac{0}{x - 2} + \frac{-3}{(x - 2)^2} $$

$$ \frac{4x^2 - 22x + 7}{(2x + 3)(x - 2)^2} = \frac{4}{2x + 3} - \frac{3}{(x - 2)^2} $$

**9.**

$$ \frac{4x^3 + 16x + 7}{(x^2 + 4)^2} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{4x^3 + 16x + 7}{(x^2 + 4)^2} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{4x^3 + 16x + 7}{(x^2 + 4)^2} = \frac{Ax + B}{x^2 + 4} + \frac{Cx + D}{(x^2 + 4)^2} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x^2 + 4)^2 $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{4x^3 + 16x + 7}{(x^2 + 4)^2} = \frac{(Ax + B)(x^2 + 4)}{x^2 + 4} + \frac{Cx + D}{(x^2 + 4)^2} $$

$$ = \frac{(Ax + B)(x^2 + 4) + Cx + D}{(x^2 + 4)^2} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 4x^3 + 16x + 7 = (Ax + B)(x^2 + 4) + Cx + D $$

Since we have a quadratic, our strategy changes, and we'll have to multiply
everything out and collect like terms.

$$ 4x^3 + 16x + 7 = Ax^3 + Bx^2 + 4Ax + 4B + Cx + D $$

$$ 4x^3 + 16x + 7 = Ax^3 + Bx^2 + (4A + C)x + 4B + D $$

Then set the coefficients as equal:

$$ 4x^3 = Ax^3 $$

$$ 4 = A $$

$$ 0 = Bx^2 $$

$$ 0 = B $$

$$ 16x = (4A + C)x $$

$$ 16 = 4A + C $$

$$ 16 = 4A + C $$

$$ 7 = 4B + D $$

We can then use the values of $A$ and $B$ to solve for $C$ and $D$:

$$ 16 = 4A + C $$

$$ 16 = 4(4) + C $$

$$ 16 = 16 + C $$

$$ 0 = C $$

$$ 7 = 4(0) + D $$

$$ 7 = D $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{4x^3 + 16x + 7}{(x^2 + 4)^2} = \frac{Ax + B}{x^2 + 4} + \frac{Cx + D}{(x^2 + 4)^2} $$

$$ \frac{4x^3 + 16x + 7}{(x^2 + 4)^2} = \frac{4x + 0}{x^2 + 4} + \frac{0x + 7}{(x^2 + 4)^2} $$

$$ \frac{4x^3 + 16x + 7}{(x^2 + 4)^2} = \frac{4x}{x^2 + 4} + \frac{7}{(x^2 + 4)^2} $$

---

## Assignment Problems

Determine the partial fraction decomposition of each of the following
expressions.

**1.**

$$ \frac{22 + 7x}{x^2 + 5x + 4} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{22 + 7x}{x^2 + 5x + 4} = \frac{22 + 7x}{(x + 4)(x + 1)} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{22 + 7x}{x^2 + 5x + 4} = \frac{A}{x + 4} + \frac{B}{x + 1} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x + 4)(x + 1) $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{22 + 7x}{x^2 + 5x + 4} = \frac{A}{x + 4} + \frac{B}{x + 1} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x + 1)}{x + 4} + \frac{B(x + 4)}{x + 1} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x + 1) + B(x + 4)}{(x + 4)(x + 1)} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 22 + 7x = A(x + 1) + B(x + 4) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = -1 $$

$$ 22 + 7(-1) = A((-1) + 1) + B((-1) + 4) $$

$$ 22 - 7 = A(0) + B(3) $$

$$ 15 = 3B $$

$$ 5 = B $$

$$ x = -4 $$

$$ 22 + 7(-4) = A((-4) + 1) + B((-4) + 4) $$

$$ 22 - 28 = A(-3) + B(0) $$

$$ -6 = -3A $$

$$ 2 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{22 + 7x}{x^2 + 5x + 4} = \frac{A}{x + 4} + \frac{B}{x + 1} $$

$$ \frac{22 + 7x}{x^2 + 5x + 4} = \frac{2}{x + 4} + \frac{5}{x + 1} $$

**2.**

$$ \frac{7x - 44}{4x^2 + 25x - 21} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{7x - 44}{4x^2 + 25x - 21} = \frac{7x - 44}{(4x - 3)(x + 7)} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{7x - 44}{4x^2 + 25x - 21} = \frac{A}{4x - 3} + \frac{B}{x + 7} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (4x - 3)(x + 7) $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{7x - 44}{4x^2 + 25x - 21} = \frac{A}{4x - 3} + \frac{B}{x + 7} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x + 7)}{4x - 3} + \frac{B(4x - 3)}{x + 7} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x + 7) + B(4x - 3)}{(4x - 3)(x + 7)} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 7x - 44 = A(x + 7) + B(4x - 3) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = -7 $$

$$ 7(-7) - 44 = A((-7) + 7) + B(4(-7) - 3) $$

$$ -49 - 44 = A(0) + B(-28 - 3) $$

$$ -93 = -31B $$

$$ 3 = B $$

$$ x = \frac{3}{4} $$

$$ 7\left(\frac{3}{4}\right) - 44 = A\left(\left(\frac{3}{4}\right) + 7\right) + B\left(4\left(\frac{3}{4}\right) - 3\right) $$

$$ \frac{21}{4} - 44 = A\left(\frac{31}{4}\right) + B(0) $$

$$ -\frac{155}{4} = \frac{31}{4}A $$

$$ -5 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{7x - 44}{4x^2 + 25x - 21} = \frac{A}{4x - 3} + \frac{B}{x + 7} $$

$$ \frac{7x - 44}{4x^2 + 25x - 21} = \frac{-5}{4x - 3} + \frac{3}{x + 7} $$

$$ \frac{7x - 44}{4x^2 + 25x - 21} = -\frac{5}{4x - 3} + \frac{3}{x + 7} $$

**3.**

$$ \frac{-x - 47}{x^2 - 11x + 24} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{-x - 47}{x^2 - 11x + 24} = \frac{-x - 47}{(x - 8)(x - 3)} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{-x - 47}{x^2 - 11x + 24} = \frac{A}{x - 8} + \frac{B}{x - 3} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x - 8)(x - 3) $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{-x - 47}{x^2 - 11x + 24} = \frac{A(x - 3)}{x - 8} + \frac{B(x - 8)}{x - 3} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x - 3) + B(x - 8)}{(x - 8)(x - 3)} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ -x - 47 = A(x - 3) + B(x - 8) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = 3 $$

$$ -(3) - 47 = A((3) - 3) + B((3) - 8) $$

$$ -50 = A(0) + B(-5) $$

$$ -50 = -5B $$

$$ 10 = B $$

$$ x = 8 $$

$$ -(8) - 47 = A((8) - 3) + B((8) - 8) $$

$$ -55 = A(5) + B(0) $$

$$ -55 = 5A $$

$$ -11 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{-x - 47}{x^2 - 11x + 24} = \frac{A}{x - 8} + \frac{B}{x - 3} $$

$$ \frac{-x - 47}{x^2 - 11x + 24} = \frac{-11}{x - 8} + \frac{10}{x - 3} $$

$$ \frac{-x - 47}{x^2 - 11x + 24} = -\frac{11}{x - 8} + \frac{10}{x - 3} $$

**4.**

$$ \frac{5 - 38x}{8x^2 + 2x - 1} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{5 - 38x}{8x^2 + 2x - 1} = \frac{5 - 38x}{(4x - 1)(2x + 1)} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{5 - 38x}{8x^2 + 2x - 1} = \frac{A}{4x - 1} + \frac{B}{2x + 1} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (4x - 1)(2x + 1) $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{5 - 38x}{8x^2 + 2x - 1} = \frac{A}{4x - 1} + \frac{B}{2x + 1} $$

$$ = \frac{A(2x + 1)}{4x - 1} + \frac{B(4x - 1)}{2x + 1} $$

$$ = \frac{A(2x + 1) + B(4x - 1)}{(4x - 1)(2x + 1)} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 5 - 38x = A(2x + 1) + B(4x - 1) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = -\frac{1}{2} $$

$$ 5 - 38\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right) = A\left(2\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right) + 1\right) + B\left(4\left(-\frac{1}{2}\right) - 1\right) $$

$$ 24 = A(0) + B(-2 - 1) $$

$$ 24 = -3B $$

$$ -8 = B $$

$$ x = \frac{1}{4} $$

$$ 5 - 38\left(\frac{1}{4}\right) = A\left(2\left(\frac{1}{4}\right) + 1\right) + B\left(4\left(\frac{1}{4}\right) - 1\right) $$

$$ -\frac{9}{2} = A\left(\frac{3}{2}\right) + B(0) $$

$$ -\frac{9}{2} = \frac{3}{2}A $$

$$ -3 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{5 - 38x}{8x^2 + 2x - 1} = \frac{A}{4x - 1} + \frac{B}{2x + 1} $$

$$ \frac{5 - 38x}{8x^2 + 2x - 1} = \frac{-3}{4x - 1} + \frac{-8}{2x + 1} $$

$$ \frac{5 - 38x}{8x^2 + 2x - 1} = -\frac{3}{4x - 1} - \frac{8}{2x + 1} $$

**5.**

$$ \frac{6x^2 + 50x + 16}{(x - 1)(x + 2)(x + 7)} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{6x^2 + 50x + 16}{(x - 1)(x + 2)(x + 7)} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{6x^2 + 50x + 16}{(x - 1)(x + 2)(x + 7)} = \frac{A}{x - 1} + \frac{B}{x + 2} + \frac{C}{x + 7} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x - 1)(x + 2)(x + 7) $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{6x^2 + 50x + 16}{(x - 1)(x + 2)(x + 7)} = \frac{A}{x - 1} + \frac{B}{x + 2} + \frac{C}{x + 7} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x + 2)(x + 7)}{x - 1} + \frac{B(x - 1)(x + 7)}{x + 2} + \frac{C(x - 1)(x + 2)}{x + 7} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x + 2)(x + 7) + B(x - 1)(x + 7) + C(x - 1)(x + 2)}{(x - 1)(x + 2)(x + 7)} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 6x^2 + 50x + 16 = A(x + 2)(x + 7) + B(x - 1)(x + 7) + C(x - 1)(x + 2) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = -2 $$

$$ 6(-2)^2 + 50(-2) + 16 = A((-2) + 2)((-2) + 7) + B((-2) - 1)((-2) + 7) + C((-2) - 1)((-2) + 2) $$

$$ 6(4) - 100 + 16 = A(0)(5) + B(-3)(5) + C(-3)(0) $$

$$ 24 - 100 + 16 = -15B $$

$$ -60 = -15B $$

$$ 4 = B $$

$$ x = -7 $$

$$ 6(-7)^2 + 50(-7) + 16 = A((-7) + 2)((-7) + 7) + B((-7) - 1)((-7) + 7) + C((-7) - 1)((-7) + 2) $$

$$ 6(49) - 350 + 16 = A(-5)(0) + B(-8)(0) + C(-8)(-5) $$

$$ 294 - 350 + 16 = 40C $$

$$ -40 = 40C $$

$$ -1 = C $$

$$ x = 1 $$

$$ 6(1)^2 + 50(1) + 16 = A((1) + 2)((1) + 7) + B((1) - 1)((1) + 7) + C((1) - 1)((1) + 2) $$

$$ 6 + 50 +  16 = A(3)(8) + B(0)(8) + C(0)(3) $$

$$ 72 = 24A $$

$$ 3 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{6x^2 + 50x + 16}{(x - 1)(x + 2)(x + 7)} = \frac{A}{x - 1} + \frac{B}{x + 2} + \frac{C}{x + 7} $$

$$ \frac{6x^2 + 50x + 16}{(x - 1)(x + 2)(x + 7)} = \frac{3}{x - 1} + \frac{4}{x + 2} + \frac{-1}{x + 7} $$

$$ \frac{6x^2 + 50x + 16}{(x - 1)(x + 2)(x + 7)} = \frac{3}{x - 1} + \frac{4}{x + 2} - \frac{1}{x + 7} $$

**6.**

$$ \frac{32x^2 + 39x - 8}{(x + 1)(x + 2)(2x - 3)} $$

Factor the denominator:

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

Determine the LCD:

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

Set the numerators equal to each other:

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

**7.**

$$ \frac{36 + 115x - 19x^2}{(x + 3)(x - 5)(4x - 3)} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{36 + 115x - 19x^2}{(x + 3)(x - 5)(4x - 3)} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{36 + 115x - 19x^2}{(x + 3)(x - 5)(4x - 3)} = \frac{A}{x + 3} + \frac{B}{x - 5} + \frac{C}{4x - 3} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x + 3)(x - 5)(4x - 3) $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{36 + 115x - 19x^2}{(x + 3)(x - 5)(4x - 3)} = \frac{A}{x + 3} + \frac{B}{x - 5} + \frac{C}{4x - 3} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x - 5)(4x - 3)}{x + 3} + \frac{B(x + 3)(4x - 3)}{x - 5} + \frac{C(x + 3)(x - 5)}{4x - 3} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x - 5)(4x - 3) + B(x + 3)(4x - 3) + C(x + 3)(x - 5)}{(x + 3)(x - 5)(4x - 3)} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 36 + 115x - 19x^2 = A(x - 5)(4x - 3) + B(x + 3)(4x - 3) + C(x + 3)(x - 5) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = 5 $$

$$ 36 + 115(5) - 19(5)^2 = A((5) - 5)(4(5) - 3) + B((5) + 3)(4(5) - 3) + C((5) + 3)((5) - 5) $$

$$ 136 = A(0)(17) + B(8)(17) + C(8)(0) $$

$$ 136 = 136B $$

$$ 1 = B $$

$$ x = \frac{3}{4} $$

$$ 36 + 115\left(\frac{3}{4}\right) - 19\left(\frac{3}{4}\right)^2 = A\left(\left(\frac{3}{4}\right) - 5\right)\left(4\left(\frac{3}{4}\right) - 3\right) + B\left(\left(\frac{3}{4}\right) + 3\right)\left(4\left(\frac{3}{4}\right) - 3\right) + C\left(\left(\frac{3}{4}\right) + 3\right)\left(\left(\frac{3}{4}\right) - 5\right) $$

$$ \frac{1785}{16} = A\left(-\frac{17}{4}\right)(0) + B\left(\frac{15}{4}\right)(0) + C\left(\frac{15}{4}\right)\left(-\frac{17}{4}\right) $$

$$ \frac{1785}{16} = -\frac{255}{16}C $$

$$ -7 = C $$

$$ x = -3 $$

$$ 36 + 115(-3) - 19(-3)^2 = A((-3) - 5)(4(-3) - 3) + B((-3) + 3)(4(-3) - 3) + C((-3) + 3)((-3) - 5) $$

$$ -480 = A(-8)(-15) + B(0)(-15) + C(0)(-8) $$

$$ -480 = 120A $$

$$ -4 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{36 + 115x - 19x^2}{(x + 3)(x - 5)(4x - 3)} = \frac{A}{x + 3} + \frac{B}{x - 5} + \frac{C}{4x - 3} $$

$$ \frac{36 + 115x - 19x^2}{(x + 3)(x - 5)(4x - 3)} = \frac{-4}{x + 3} + \frac{1}{x - 5} + \frac{-7}{4x - 3} $$

$$ \frac{36 + 115x - 19x^2}{(x + 3)(x - 5)(4x - 3)} = -\frac{4}{x + 3} + \frac{1}{x - 5} - \frac{7}{4x - 3} $$

**8.**

$$ \frac{3 - 5x}{(x - 3)^2} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{3 - 5x}{(x - 3)^2} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{3 - 5x}{(x - 3)^2} = \frac{A}{x - 3} + \frac{B}{(x - 3)^2} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x - 3)^2 $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{3 - 5x}{(x - 3)^2} = \frac{A(x - 3)}{x - 3} + \frac{B}{(x - 3)^2} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x - 3) + B}{(x - 3)y2} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 3 - 5x = A(x - 3) + B $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = 3 $$

$$ 3 - 5(3) = A((3) - 3) + B $$

$$ 3 - 15 = B $$

$$ -12 = B $$

Since the denominator is a perfect square, we can determine $x$ by seting $x$ to
a0$ and plugging in the value for $B$:

$$ 3 - 5(0) = A((0) - 3) + (-12) $$

$$ 3 = A(-3) - 12 $$

$$ 15 = -3A $$

$$ -5 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{3 - 5x}{(x - 3)^2} = \frac{A}{x - 3} + \frac{B}{(x - 3)^2} $$

$$ \frac{3 - 5x}{(x - 3)^2} = \frac{-5}{x - 3} + \frac{-12}{(x - 3)^2} $$

$$ \frac{3 - 5x}{(x - 3)^2} = -\frac{5}{x - 3} - \frac{12}{(x - 3)^2} $$

**9.**

$$ \frac{24x + 41}{(3x + 5)^2} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{24x + 41}{(3x + 5)^2} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{24x + 41}{(3x + 5)^2} = \frac{A}{3x + 5} + \frac{B}{(3x + 5)^2} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (3x + 5)^2 $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{24x + 41}{(3x + 5)^2} = \frac{A(3x + 5)}{3x + 5} + \frac{B}{(3x + 5)^2} $$

$$ = \frac{A(3x + 5) + B}{(3x + 5)^2} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 24x + 41 = A(3x + 5) + B $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = -\frac{5}{3} $$

$$ 24\left(-\frac{5}{3}\right) + 41 = A\left(3\left(-\frac{5}{3}\right) + 5\right) + B $$

$$ 1 = A(0) + B $$

$$ 1 = B $$

Since our denominator is a perfect square, we can find $A$ by plugging in $x =
0$ and also the value of $B$.

$$ 24(0) + 41 = A(3(0) + 5) + (1) $$

$$ 41 = A(5) + 1 $$

$$ 40 = 5A $$

$$ 8 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{24x + 41}{(3x + 5)^2} = \frac{A}{3x + 5} + \frac{B}{(3x + 5)^2} $$

$$ \frac{24x + 41}{(3x + 5)^2} = \frac{8}{3x + 5} + \frac{1}{(3x + 5)^2} $$

**10.**

$$ \frac{10x + 93}{(x + 10)^2} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{10x + 93}{(x + 10)^2} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{10x + 93}{(x + 10)^2} = \frac{A}{x + 10} + \frac{B}{(x + 10)^2} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x + 10)^2 $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{10x + 93}{(x + 10)^2} = \frac{A(x + 10)}{x + 10} + \frac{B}{(x + 10)^2} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x + 10) + B}{(x + 10)^2} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 10x + 93 = A(x + 10) + B $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = -10 $$

$$ 10(-10) + 93 = A((-10) + 10) + B $$

$$ -7 = A(0) + B $$

$$ -7 = B $$

Since our denominator is a perfect square, we can find $A$ by plugging in $x =
0$ and the value of $B$:

$$ 10(0) + 93 = A((0) + 10) + (-7) $$

$$ 93 = 10A - 7 $$

$$ 100 = 10A $$

$$ 10 = A $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{10x + 93}{(x + 10)^2} = \frac{A}{x + 10} + \frac{B}{(x + 10)^2} $$

$$ \frac{10x + 93}{(x + 10)^2} = \frac{10}{x + 10} + \frac{-7}{(x + 10)^2} $$

$$ \frac{10x + 93}{(x + 10)^2} = \frac{10}{x + 10} - \frac{7}{(x + 10)^2} $$

**11.**

$$ \frac{7x^2 + 31x + 107}{(x - 4)(x + 3)^2} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{7x^2 + 31x + 107}{(x - 4)(x + 3)^2} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{7x^2 + 31x + 107}{(x - 4)(x + 3)^2} = \frac{A}{x - 4} + \frac{B}{x + 3} + \frac{C}{(x + 3)^2} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x - 4)(x + 3)^2 $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{7x^2 + 31x + 107}{(x - 4)(x + 3)^2} = \frac{A(x + 3)^2}{x - 4} + \frac{B(x - 4)(x + 3)}{x + 3} + \frac{C(x - 4)}{(x + 3)^2} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x + 3)^2 + B(x - 4)(x + 3) + C(x - 4)}{(x - 4)(x + 3)^2} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 7x^2 + 31x + 107 = A(x + 3)^2 + B(x - 4)(x + 3) + C(x - 4) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = -3 $$

$$ 7(-3)^2 + 31(-3) + 107 = A((-3) + 3)^2 + B((-3) - 4)((-3) + 3) + C((-3) - 4) $$

$$ 77 = A(0)^2 + B(-7)(0) + C(-7) $$

$$ 77 = -7C $$

$$ -11 = C $$

$$ x = 4 $$

$$ 7(4)^2 + 31(4) + 107 = A((4) + 3)^2 + B((4) - 4)((4) + 3) + C((4) - 4) $$

$$ 343 = A(7)^2 + B(0)(7) + C(0) $$

$$ 343 = 49A $$

$$ 7 = A $$

We can find $B$ by setting $x = 0$ and plugging in $A$ and $C$:

$$ 7(0)^2 + 31(0) + 107 = (7)((0) + 3)^2 + B((0) - 4)((0) + 3) + (-11)((0) - 4) $$

$$ 107 = 7(3)^2 + B(-4)(3) - 11(-4) $$

$$ 107 = 63 - 12B + 44 $$

$$ 107 = 107 - 12B $$

$$ 0 = -12B $$

$$ 0 = B $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{7x^2 + 31x + 107}{(x - 4)(x + 3)^2} = \frac{A}{x - 4} + \frac{B}{x + 3} + \frac{C}{(x + 3)^2} $$

$$ \frac{7x^2 + 31x + 107}{(x - 4)(x + 3)^2} = \frac{7}{x - 4} + \frac{0}{x + 3} + \frac{-11}{(x + 3)^2} $$

$$ \frac{7x^2 + 31x + 107}{(x - 4)(x + 3)^2} = \frac{7}{x - 4} - \frac{11}{(x + 3)^2} $$

**12.**

$$ \frac{9x^2 - 58x - 37}{(x + 7)(x - 2)^2} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{9x^2 - 58x - 37}{(x + 7)(x - 2)^2} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{9x^2 - 58x - 37}{(x + 7)(x - 2)^2} = \frac{A}{x + 7} + \frac{B}{x - 2} + \frac{C}{(x - 2)^2} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x + 7)(x - 2)^2 $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{9x^2 - 58x - 37}{(x + 7)(x - 2)^2} = \frac{A(x - 2)^2}{x + 7} + \frac{B(x + 7)(x - 2)}{x - 2} + \frac{C(x + 7)}{(x - 2)^2} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x - 2)^2 + B(x + 7)(x - 2) + C(x + 7)}{(x + 7)(x - 2)^2} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 9x^2 - 58x - 37 = A(x - 2)^2 + B(x + 7)(x - 2) + C(x + 7) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = 2 $$

$$ 9(2)^2 - 58(2) - 37 = A((2) - 2)^2 + B((2) + 7)((2) - 2) + C((2) + 7) $$

$$ -117 = A(0)^2 + B(9)(0) + C(9) $$

$$ -117 = 9C $$

$$ -13 = C $$

$$ x = -7 $$

$$ 9(-7)^2 - 58(-7) - 37 = A((-7) - 2)^2 + B((-7) + 7)((-7) - 2) + C((-7) + 7) $$

$$ 810 = A(-9)^2 + B(0)(-9) + C(0) $$

$$ 810 = 81A $$

$$ 10 = A $$

We can find $B$ by plugging in $x = 0$ and the values of $A$ and $C$:

$$ 9(0)^2 - 58(0) - 37 = (10)((0) - 2)^2 + B((0) + 7)((0) - 2) + (-13)((0) + 7) $$

$$ -37 = 10(-2)^2 + B(7)(-2) - 13(7) $$

$$ -37 = 40 - 14B - 91 $$

$$ -37 = -51 - 14B $$

$$ 14 = -14B $$

$$ -1 = B $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{9x^2 - 58x - 37}{(x + 7)(x - 2)^2} = \frac{A}{x + 7} + \frac{B}{x - 2} + \frac{C}{(x - 2)^2} $$

$$ \frac{9x^2 - 58x - 37}{(x + 7)(x - 2)^2} = \frac{10}{x + 7} + \frac{-1}{x - 2} + \frac{-13}{(x - 2)^2} $$

$$ \frac{9x^2 - 58x - 37}{(x + 7)(x - 2)^2} = \frac{10}{x + 7} - \frac{1}{x - 2} - \frac{13}{(x - 2)^2} $$

**13.**

$$ \frac{21x^2 - 43x + 20}{(3x - 2)(x - 1)^2} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{21x^2 - 43x + 20}{(3x - 2)(x - 1)^2} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{21x^2 - 43x + 20}{(3x - 2)(x - 1)^2} = \frac{A}{3x - 2} + \frac{B}{x - 1} + \frac{C}{(x - 1)^2} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (3x - 2)(x - 1)^2 $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{21x^2 - 43x + 20}{(3x - 2)(x - 1)^2} = \frac{A(x - 1)^2}{3x - 2} + \frac{B(3x - 2)(x - 1)}{x - 1} + \frac{C(3x - 2)}{(x - 1)^2} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x - 2)^2 + B(3x - 2)(x - 1) + C(3x - 2)}{(3x - 2)(x - 1)^2} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 21x^2 - 43x + 20 = A(x - 1)^2 + B(3x - 2)(x - 1) + C(3x - 2) $$

Set $x$ so that one by one, the coefficients, when multiplied, are $0$.

$$ x = 1 $$

$$ 21(1)^2 - 43(1) + 20 = A((1) - 1)^2 + B(3(1) - 2)((1) - 1) + C(3(1) - 2) $$

$$ -2 = A(0)^2 + B(1)(0) + C(1) $$

$$ -2 = C $$

$$ x = \frac{2}{3} $$

$$ 21\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)^2 - 43\left(\frac{2}{3}\right) + 20 = A\left(\left(\frac{2}{3}\right) - 1\right)^2 + B\left(3\left(\frac{2}{3}\right) - 2\right)\left(\left(\frac{2}{3}\right) - 1\right) + C\left(3\left(\frac{2}{3}\right) - 2\right) $$

$$ \frac{2}{3} = A\left(-\frac{1}{3}\right)^2 + B(0)\left(-\frac{1}{3}\right) + C(0)$$

$$ \frac{2}{3} = \frac{1}{9}A $$

$$ 6 = A $$

We can find $B$ by plugging in $x = 0$ and the values of $A$ and $C$:

$$ 21(0)^2 - 43(0) + 20 = (6)((0) - 1)^2 + B(3(0) - 2)((0) - 1) + (-2)(3(0) - 2) $$

$$ 20 = 6(-1)^2 + B(-2)(-1) - 2(1) $$

$$ 20 = 6 + 2B - 2 $$

$$ 20 = 4 + 2B $$

$$ 16 = 2B $$

$$ 8 = B $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{21x^2 - 43x + 20}{(3x - 2)(x - 1)^2} = \frac{A}{3x - 2} + \frac{B}{x - 1} + \frac{C}{(x - 1)^2} $$

$$ \frac{21x^2 - 43x + 20}{(3x - 2)(x - 1)^2} = \frac{6}{3x - 2} + \frac{8}{x - 1} + \frac{-2}{(x - 1)^2} $$

$$ \frac{21x^2 - 43x + 20}{(3x - 2)(x - 1)^2} = \frac{6}{3x - 2} + \frac{8}{x - 1} - \frac{2}{(x - 1)^2} $$

**14.**

$$ \frac{-7x^2 + 108x - 11}{x(x^2 - 9x + 1)} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{-7x^2 + 108x - 11}{x(x^2 - 9x + 1)} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{-7x^2 + 108x - 11}{x(x^2 - 9x + 1)} = \frac{A}{x} + \frac{Bx + C}{x^2 - 9x + 1} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = x(x^2 - 9x + 1) $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{-7x^2 + 108x - 11}{x(x^2 - 9x + 1)} = \frac{A(x^2 - 9x + 1)}{x} + \frac{(Bx + C)(x)}{x^2 - 9x + 1} $$

$$ = \frac{A(x^2 - 9x + 1) + x(Bx + C)}{x(x^2 - 9x + 1)} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ -7x^2 + 108x - 11 = A(x^2 - 9x + 1) + x(Bx + C) $$

Distribute in order to line up the coefficients.

$$ -7x^2 + 108x - 11 = Ax^2 - 9Ax + A + Bx^2 + Cx $$

$$ -7x^2 + 108x - 11 = (A + B)x^2 + (-9A + C)x + A $$

$$ -7 = A + B $$

$$ 108 = -9A + C $$

$$ -11 = A $$

Using the value of $A$, we can determine the values of $B$ and $C$:

$$ -7 = (-11) + B $$

$$ 4 = B $$

$$ 108 = -9(-11) + C $$

$$ 108 = 99 + C $$

$$ 9 = C $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{-7x^2 + 108x - 11}{x(x^2 - 9x + 1)} = \frac{A}{x} + \frac{Bx + C}{x^2 - 9x + 1} $$

$$ \frac{-7x^2 + 108x - 11}{x(x^2 - 9x + 1)} = \frac{-11}{x} + \frac{4x + 9}{x^2 - 9x + 1} $$

$$ \frac{-7x^2 + 108x - 11}{x(x^2 - 9x + 1)} = -\frac{11}{x} + \frac{4x + 9}{x^2 - 9x + 1} $$

**15.**

$$ \frac{24x^2 + 2x + 117}{x(2x^2 + x + 13)} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{24x^2 + 2x + 117}{x(2x^2 + x + 13)} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{24x^2 + 2x + 117}{x(2x^2 + x + 13)} = \frac{A}{x} + \frac{Bx + C}{2x^2 + x + 13} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = x(2x^2 + x + 13) $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{24x^2 + 2x + 117}{x(2x^2 + x + 13)} = \frac{A(2x^2 + x + 13)}{x} + \frac{(Bx + C)(x)}{2x^2 + x + 13} $$

$$ = \frac{A(2x^2 + x + 13) + x(Bx + C)}{x(2x^2 + x + 13)} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 24x^2 + 2x + 117 = A(2x^2 + x + 13) + x(Bx + C) $$

Distribute the equation so that the coefficients line up.

$$ 24x^2 + 2x + 117 = 2Ax^2 + Ax + 13A + Bx^2 + Cx $$

$$ 24x^2 + 2x + 117 = (2A + B)x^2 + (A + C)x + 13A $$

$$ 24 = 2A + B $$

$$ 2 = A + C $$

$$ 117 = 13A $$

$$ 9 = A $$

Using the value of $A$, we can find the values of $B$ and $C$:

$$ 24 = 2(9) + B $$

$$ 24 = 18 + B $$

$$ 6 = B $$

$$ 2 = (9) + C $$

$$ -7 = C $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{24x^2 + 2x + 117}{x(2x^2 + x + 13)} = \frac{A}{x} + \frac{Bx + C}{2x^2 + x + 13} $$

$$ \frac{24x^2 + 2x + 117}{x(2x^2 + x + 13)} = \frac{9}{x} + \frac{6x + (-7)}{2x^2 + x + 13} $$

$$ \frac{24x^2 + 2x + 117}{x(2x^2 + x + 13)} = \frac{9}{x} + \frac{6x - 7}{2x^2 + x + 13} $$

**16.**

$$ \frac{2 - 11x + x^2 - 7x^3}{(x^2 + 2)^2} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{2 - 11x + x^2 - 7x^3}{(x^2 + 2)^2} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{2 - 11x + x^2 - 7x^3}{(x^2 + 2)^2} = \frac{Ax + B}{x^2 + 2} + \frac{Cx + D}{(x^2 + 2)^2}$$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x^2 + 2)^2 $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{2 - 11x + x^2 - 7x^3}{(x^2 + 2)^2} = \frac{(Ax + B)(x^2 + 2)}{x^2 + 2} + \frac{Cx + D}{(x^2 + 2)^2}$$

$$ = \frac{(Ax + B)(x^2 + 2) + Cx + D}{(x^2 + 2)^2} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 2 - 11x + x^2 - 7x^3 = (Ax + B)(x^2 + 2) + Cx + D $$

Distribute the equation so that the coefficients line up.

$$ -7x^3 + x^2 - 11x + 2 = (Ax + B)(x^2 + 2) + Cx + D $$

$$ -7x^3 + x^2 - 11x + 2 = Ax^3 + Bx^2 + 2Ax + 2B + Cx + D $$

$$ -7x^3 + x^2 - 11x + 2 = Ax^3 + Bx^2 + (2A + C)x + 2B + D $$

$$ -7 = A $$

$$ 1 = B $$

$$ -11 = 2A + C $$

$$ 2 = 2B + D $$

Using the values of $A$ and $B$, we can find the values of $C$ and $D$:

$$ -11 = 2(-7) + C $$

$$ -11 = -14 + C $$

$$ 3 = C $$

$$ 2 = 2(1) + D $$

$$ 2 = 2 + D $$

$$ 0 = D $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{2 - 11x + x^2 - 7x^3}{(x^2 + 2)^2} = \frac{Ax + B}{x^2 + 2} + \frac{Cx + D}{(x^2 + 2)^2}$$

$$ \frac{2 - 11x + x^2 - 7x^3}{(x^2 + 2)^2} = \frac{(-7)x + 1}{x^2 + 2} + \frac{3x + 0}{(x^2 + 2)^2}$$

$$ \frac{2 - 11x + x^2 - 7x^3}{(x^2 + 2)^2} = \frac{-7x + 1}{x^2 + 2} + \frac{3x}{(x^2 + 2)^2}$$

**17.**

$$ \frac{4x^3 - 3x^2 - 5x - 5}{(x^2 + 1)^2} $$

Factor the denominator:

$$ \frac{4x^3 - 3x^2 - 5x - 5}{(x^2 + 1)^2} $$

The partial fraction decomposition will look like:

$$ \frac{4x^3 - 3x^2 - 5x - 5}{(x^2 + 1)^2} = \frac{Ax + B}{x^2 + 1} + \frac{Cx + D}{(x^2 + 1)^2} $$

Determine the LCD:

$$ LCD = (x^2 + 1)^2 $$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by whatever is missing then add.

$$ \frac{4x^3 - 3x^2 - 5x - 5}{(x^2 + 1)^2} = \frac{(Ax + B)(x^2 + 1)}{x^2 + 1} + \frac{Cx + D}{(x^2 + 1)^2} $$

$$ = \frac{(Ax + B)(x^2 + 1) + Cx + D}{(x^2 + 1)^2} $$

Set the numerators equal to each other:

$$ 4x^3 - 3x^2 - 5x - 5 = (Ax + B)(x^2 + 1) + Cx + D $$

Distribute the equation so that the coefficients line up.

$$ 4x^3 - 3x^2 - 5x - 5 = Ax^3 + Bx^2 + Ax + B + Cx + D $$

$$ 4x^3 - 3x^2 - 5x - 5 = Ax^3 + Bx^2 + (A + C)x + B + D $$

$$ 4 = A $$

$$ -3 = B $$

$$ -5 = A + C $$

$$ -5 = B + D $$

Using the values of $A$ and $B$, we can find the values of $C$ and $D$:

$$ -5 = (4) + C $$

$$ -9 = C $$

$$ -2 = D $$

Plug coefficients back into what our original partial fraction decomposition
would look like:

$$ \frac{4x^3 - 3x^2 - 5x - 5}{(x^2 + 1)^2} = \frac{Ax + B}{x^2 + 1} + \frac{Cx + D}{(x^2 + 1)^2} $$

$$ \frac{4x^3 - 3x^2 - 5x - 5}{(x^2 + 1)^2} = \frac{4x + (-3)}{x^2 + 1} + \frac{(-9)x + (-2)}{(x^2 + 1)^2} $$

$$ \frac{4x^3 - 3x^2 - 5x - 5}{(x^2 + 1)^2} = \frac{4x - 3}{x^2 + 1} + \frac{-9x - 2}{(x^2 + 1)^2} $$
